in the beginning the creator, karora, lay sleeping in the place now called il- balintja, in what would later become a soak. he was covered by rich soil and a myriad of flowers and other plants. yet there was only darkness everywhere. suddenly from the center of the ground above karora a beautifully decorated and living tnatantja pole rose and grew all the way to the sky. the godês head lay under the ground on the roots of the pole, and in that head were thoughts that somehow became real. as he thought or dreamed, huge bandicoots slithered out of his navel and armpits and broke through the soil above, and the sun began to rise over ilbalintja. the sun having brought light, karora burst through the earth, his emergence leaving a gaping hole·the ibalintja soak·which filled with the bloodlike juice of the honey- suckle. having left the earth, karoraês body lost its magical powers, and the god became hungry. he grasped two of the bandicoots writhing around him and roasted them in the heat of the new sun. as the sun went down decked in neck- laces and a veil of hair strings, the great ancestor thought about a helper but fell asleep with his arms stretched out. as he slept, a bull-roarer emerged from his armpit and turned into a young man. in the morning karora woke up to find his new companion lying next to him but without life. the ancestor, his body now decorated, made the sacred raiankintja call. the sound gave life to his child, and father and son did the ceremonial dance. during the next nights karora gave birth to many more sons, all of whom became hungry and ate bandicoots until not one was left. karora sent his sons into the plains to find more bandicoots, but they returned hungry. on the third day the sons heard what they thought was a bull-roarer sound and began searching in bandicoot nests until a strange hairy animal hopped out. „itês a sand hill wallaby,‰ the men shouted, and they broke one of the animalês legs with their sticks before it could cry out, „you have lamed me; i am not a real an- imal, but tjenterama, a man like you.‰ the hunters backed off as the wallaby limped away. karora met his sons when they re- turned home. he led them to ilbalintja soak and ordered them to sit in a circle around it. then the honeysuckle juice rose and swept them down into the soak and underground to the injured tjen- terama, their new leader. they remained there forever and became objects of wor- ship to the people who came later. karora returned to his old sleeping place in the soak. the people still go there to drink and honor him with gifts of greens. karora smiles in his sleep, happy to have them visit.