once there was light everywhere all the time. the light shone on the motherstone, quatgoro, and one day she broke open to release quat and his eleven brothers, all named tangaro and each representing a characteristic or a plant. the brothers grew up immediately. quat carved the first humans from different parts of a tree, and then he pieced them together into puppet-like figures. when he had six of these puppets, he lined them up and danced in front of them until they began to come to life. then he beat his sacred drum and they began to dance. finally, quat made six of the puppets into men and six into women, and they became mates. tangaro, the foolish one, thought he could do what his older brother quat had done. using a different kind of tree, he carved six puppets and danced them into life, but then he buried them and forgot about them for a while. when he came back and dug them up they were dead and rotten, and so it is that we have death in the world. as for quat, he continued with his creative work. when he made pigs that walked on two legs, his brothers made fun of him, saying his pigs were silly looking and too much like humans. quat shortened the pigs front legs and they began to walk on all fours. quat made everything: canoes, plants, animals, rivers, and so forth. then the brothers began complaining about all the light, so quat got into his canoe and paddled to the edge of the world to oong (night). oong was completely dark and without light. it taught quat about sleep and gave him dark eyebrows and a piece of itself to take back to his own world. on his way home quat stopped at the torres islands to exchange a bit of night for some birds. from then on birds have always followed night with their chirping so that we may be ready for day when it comes. at home his brothers were waiting, and quat taught them about beds (made of coco leaves) and sleep and made them all lie down. then he released bits of night, and the sun began to disappear. „what is happening?‰ the brothers asked. quat comforted them and told them to be quiet. soon they began drifting off to sleep and they were frightened; maybe they were dying. quat reassured them; „it's only sleep, he said, and they became quiet. while the tangaro and the others were sleeping, quat cut a little hole in night with a sharp, red stone. when the birds welcomed the light and woke the brothers, they saw the red sunrise for the first time and were very happy. they began their dayss work. so it still happens.