the myth of the cosmic egg: the origin of existence: in the beginning in the dimension of empty space, thanks to the power of trigyel khugpa6 there formed the winds (the air element) tsentin, whose nature was to retain and not allow to disperse, nentin, whose substance had the characteristic to support and not allow to fall, and trinni which had a screen of heat? the movement of the winds produced a vortex of light that whirled vigorously from whose energy heat was emitted, and (the element) fire was formed. then from the cold vapour of the_ wind that supported and from the heat of the fire (the element) water was formed as dew and rime, on which minute particles of matter (rdul phra rab: the earth element) condensed. these particles, shaken and blended by the wind whirling swiftly in space, formed the earth and the mountains. from the essence of the five elements (thus formed) there came into being two eggs, an egg of light ('ad kyi sgong nga) and an egg of darkness (mun pa'i sgong nga). due to the power of the aspiration vow of the deity (trigyel khugpa) from the pure essence of the five elements the egg of light formed, with four fates and eight corners, the size of a seven year old female yak (grus ma). from the impure essence, and due to the .aspiration vow of medbum nagpo (infinite black non being)8 the egg of darkness formed, with three corners and as big as a three year old bull (shad) lying down. the luminous egg hatched by the force of its own light and its own rays, and from the clear light that spread in space were born the three hundred and sixty thorse ('thor gsas: scattered deities), men of light who took on the task of protecting virtuous actions. from the rays that gushed downwards were born the dase (mda' gsas: arrow deities), ten thousand men with one hundred thousand horses who took on the task of sustaining heroism in deities and men. from the inner ~ssence of the egg was born the emanation of trigyel khugpa called sidpa sangpo bumtri, a divine manifestation in human form, a white man with seven turquoise ~ plaits down to his armpits. he is the king of existence, of plenitude, of the good (dkar: literally, 'white') and of virtue. the black egg hatched in the dimension of black darkness, and from the black light that was emitted upwards were born darkness, obfuscation (thibs) and obscuration (rmugs). from the rays that spread falling downwards were born madness, obfuscation and obscuration. from the inner essence of the egg was born a man of black light with his hair tied in three big plaits. medbum nagpo gave him the name munpa serden (radiant black darkness). he is a king who likes to annihilate and to empty, to interrupt and to destroy.