the nine original families emerged from bunches of bananas and then came down from mount nunusaka to the place now called nine dance grounds in west ceram. one man, ameta, was much darker than the others, and he was very much a loner. he went hunting one day and killed a wild pig with a coconut caught on its tusk. no one had ever seen coconuts or coconut trees at that time, so ameta took it home and wrapped it for safe-keeping in a cloth designed with a snake figure. that night a man came to him in his dreams and instructed him to bury the nut. this ameta did in the morning, and within days it was a fine, tall palm bearing coconut blos- soms. ameta climbed the tree to harvest some fruit but cut his finger. when he re- turned to the tree after fixing his cut, he found that his blood had mixed with the treeês sap to form a face, and in a few days he found a little girl there. the dream man appeared to ameta in the night and told him to wrap the girl in his snake cloth and bring her home. this ameta did, and he named the girl hainuwele. in a few days hainuwele was grown, and amazingly, she defecated things like dishes and bells, which her father sold. it then came time for the nine families to perform the nine nights of the maro dance at nine dance grounds. as was customary, the women of the families sat in the center of the dance grounds hand- ing out betel nut to the men, who danced around them in a spiral. hainuwele was at the very center. on the first night she handed out betel nut, but on the second she gave the dancers coral instead, and on the third night she gave out fine pot- tery. in fact, she gave out more and more valuable objects each night. the people became jealous of her obvious wealth and decided to kill her. on the ninth night, having dug a deep hole at the cen- ter of the dance place, they surrounded her during the dance and edged her into the hole and covered her with earth. ameta missed his daughter and, guessing that something had happened to her, used his oracular skills to discover that she had been killed during the maro dance in nine dance grounds. he took nine pieces of palm leaf to the grounds and stuck them into the earth. the ninth one he placed at the very center of the grounds, and sure enough, when he pulled it out he found bits of his daugh- terês blood and hair. he dug up the body, cut it into many pieces, and buried all but the arms in the dance grounds. immedi- ately there grew the plants that are the staples of the ceram people to this day. ameta took hainuweleês arms to the goddess satene, who then went to nine dance grounds, built a huge gate there and stood behind it holding out the maid- enês arms. she called the nine families and announced to them that in revenge for their killing of hainuwele she would leave them, but that everyone would first have to try to pass through the gate to her. those who succeeded would remain people, those who did not would become animals and spirits. so it was that animals and spirits came into being. satene then traveled to the mountain of the dead, where anyone who follows her must die.