before anything , there existed shuzanghu and his wife, zumaing-nui. in time she gave birth to a girl (earth) and a boy (sk(the dhammai are from northern india. they are a non-hindu people.) before there was y). sky and earth mated and gave birth to the mountains. then they produced two frogs who married and made the first humans. these humans were covered with thick hair, but when they mated they produced people as they are now. how the world was created and re-created again the earth was shaped like a wheel. in the center of the world was the heaven. it was called mount meru; a mountain that was over 250,000 miles high(!) at its peak. the heaven was circled by the river ganges. the cities of indra and the other gods were along its banks. the foothills below mount meru were home to the gandharvas (the good or benevolent spirits). the demons lived in the valleys. the hood of the great serpent shesha supported the whole world. when each great flood covered the universe, shesha coiled up on the back of a tortoise. the world had many floods. at the end of each deluge, the world was born again. once, a golden cosmic egg floated on the waters that buried the world. for a thousand years the lord of the universe brooded over the egg. finally a lotus flower, as bright as a thousand suns, grew from his navel. the lotus spread and flourished until it contained the whole world. brahma sprang from the lotus with the powers of the lord of the universe. he created the world from the parts of his body. but, brahma made some mistakes, and he had to learn from them. at first he created ignorance, and then discarded it. but ignorance survived and became night. from night, the "beings of darkness" were born, and they set out to devour their creator. "how can you eat your own father?" asked brahma. some of the beings of darkness relented, but others did not soften in their desire to destroy brahma. they became the rakshasas (the enemies of men). brahma learned from the experience, and he resolved to create immortal and heavenly beings. he brought to life four sages to finish his work. but the sages lost interest in the creation, and brahma became angry. from his anger, rudra sprang forth to complete the work. when another flood covered the world, the world spirit threw a seed called nara into the waters. the seed grew inside the egg as brahma. after one year, brahma made his body into two parts. one half was male, and the other half was female. viraj, a male, grew inside the female half, and viraj created manu. manu was a sage (a rishi). manu lived ten thousand years in the worship of brahma. one day manu was meditating beside a stream. a fish spoke to him from the water. "please, protect me from this fish that is chasing me," the fish begged manu. manu put the fish into a pond. after some time, the fish grew too big for the pond. "please, place me into the river ganges," requested the fish. manu did as the fish asked. but time passed, and the fish grew too large for the river. "please, take me to the ocean," implored the fish. at last the fish was content. manu learned that he had rescued none other than brahma himself. brahma warned manu of the coming destruction of the world by a great flood. "build an ark and place in it the seven rishis and the seeds of everything," brahma instructed. no sooner did manu do as brahma asked, when the deluge began. everything in the world was blanketed by water once more. the ark tossed about upon the surface. finally, manu's ark rested upon the highest peak of the himalayas, where manu moored it to a tree. the waters receded after many years, and manu and the ark descended into the valleys. to prepare for the creation of the next age, manu performed many sacrifices. manu offered up milk, clarified butter, curds, and whey to brahma. he repeated the gesture every day. a year passed, and manu's offering grew into a beautiful woman. "i am your daughter," said the beautiful woman to manu. "together, we will perform other sacrifices to brahma. as a result you will become rich in children and cattle. you will obtain any blessing you desire." manu did as his daughter said. they were true in their devotion to brahma. in return, manu fathered the human race, and he received many blessings.