in the beginning there was only nzame (god), made up of three parts: nzame, mebere, and nkwa. the nzame part created the universe and the earth and breathed life into it. he called mebere and nkwa, to see his work. „how do you like it?‰ he asked. „do i need to make anything else?‰ mebere and nkwa said that nzame needed to make a chief for the earth. so nzame made the elephant, the leopard, and the monkey joint chiefs, but he was dissatisfied. so, nzame, mebere, and nkwa together made a creature that looked like them. the new creature took strength from nzame, leadership from mebere, and beauty from nkwa. the three part god named the creature fam (power), and ordered him to take charge of the world. then god returned to the place above the world. stop worshipping nzambe. „let nzame be where he is; i rule here,‰ he sang. when the god heard the song he became angry. „who is singing this song?‰ he called out. „try looking for him,‰ fam answered rudely. now enraged, nzame brought down thunder and lightning and destroyed everything in the world except fam, who had been promised a life without death, and nzame is always true to his word. so it is that although he went out of sight, fam is still around and creates trouble when he wants to. looking down at the barren earth, the three part god decided he had to do something about it. they applied a new layer of soil to it, and when a tree grew he caused it to drop its seeds and made new trees. when leaves fell into water they became fish, and the ones that fell on the earth became animals. before long our world was as we know it. the old burned earth is still there if we dig deep enough. we call this coal, and it still burns in fires. then nzame decided to make a new fam, but one who would experience death. this was our ancestor sekume. sekume made the first woman, mbongwe, from a tree. the first ancestors were made with both body and soul. soul gives life to body and is its shadow. when body dies, soul does not die; soul is the tiny spot in the middle of the eye. this spot is like the star in the heavens or the fire in the hearth. sekume and mbongwe had many offspring. but they were always wary of old fam who constantly tunneled up from the place underground where nzambe had placed him and did evil things to them. this is why the people tell their for a while things went well enough; the original chiefs·the elephant, the leopard, and the monkey obeyed fam. but fam grew arrogant and proud, and he began to be cruel to the animals, even to the original chiefs. and he decided to