in the beginning there was only the darkness. out of the darkness were born the night and the male, kumulipo, the essence of darkness, and the female poêele, darkness itself. these were the parents of the children of the darkness: the shellfish of the depths, the plants that grow out of the dark earth, and grubs of the earth. one birth led to another, and then there were many kinds of animals and plants. the world began to grow ighter, but there were no people yet· only the god kane-i-ka-wai-ola, who watered the plants in the diminishing darkness. eventually there was the male pouli- uli, or deep darkness, and the female powehiwehi, or darkness with a little light. this couple parented the fish of the sea. the fish swam everywhere and mul- tiplied: shark, mackerel, the hilu fish. at the same time things grew and grew on the land, but it was still dark. then poêelêele, (dark night·male), was born along with pohaha, (night com- ing into dawn·female). these were parents to the insects that fly in the night and to the grasshopper, the caterpillar, and he fly. an egg was born, too, and out of that came the bird and then many more birds. it was almost dawn, but really it was still dark. now popanopano and polalowehi were born, male and female, and they gave birth to the animals that came to the land from the sea·the turtles, lobsters, and geckoes. it was not quite light yet. po-kanokano and po-lalo-uli, male and female, were born at this point, and they began to reproduce. kamapuaêa, the pig, was born. he was dark and beautiful, and his people cultivated the flourishing islands. the foot-prints of these ancient ones born at the end of night can be seen still. po-hiolo the male and po-neêa-aku the female, whose names mean night ending, were born. they produced rat, piloêi, also near the end of night. the rat people damaged the land with their scratching and eating. now came the birth of the male, po- neêe-aku, and the female, poneiemai, whose names suggest night leaving and night pregnant. they gave birth to dawn, the dog, and the wind, and it was now almost light but still not day. po-kinikini and po-heêenalu gave birth to the time when humans came into the world. men and women, though dif- ferent, lived and slept together in deep calmness. then finally, dark laêilaêa, the woman, and dark kiêi, the man, were born. they knew the red-faced god kane. now it was daytime and our world.