at first there were the creator, kump- ara, and his wife, chingaso. their son was etsa, the sun. one night kumpara placed some mud in his mouth and spit it onto his son. in this way the girl nantu, the moon, was conceived. this complicated manner of conception was accom- plished so etsa could marry nantu, who was not born of his own mother. nantu resisted etsaês advances, however, and escaped to the sky, where she painted herself in dark somber colors and designs. a bird, auhu, who also was enamored of nantu, saw her leaving and tried to follow her, but nantu cut down the vine on which he was trying to reach the sky. etsa was extremely angry when he discovered nantuês escape, and he decided to follow her. pulled up by a par- rot on each wrist and a parakeet on each knee, he caught nantu and fought violently with her, causing eclipses. when she had been overcome, nantu wept. this is why it rains when the moonês face gets red. nantu now went off alone and produced her own child, nuhi, by breathing on dirt. the jealous bird, auhu, broke the clay child and the remains became the earth. lonely now, nantu finally agreed to be etsaês wife. they had a son, unushi the sloth, who was the first jivaro. unushi was given the forest on earth as a living place. etsa and nantu went on reproducing, always using earth as a mating place. they produced the various animals. the woman, mika, was born of a mysterious egg sent by chingaso. mika was given to unushi in marriage, and etsa and nantu instructed them on how to live. unushi was lazy, however, and did little work. to this day the jivaro women work harder than the men. unushi and mika took a canoe down the river. a son, ahimbi the water snake, was born to them in the canoe. out of other eggs sent by chingaso there came other animals and birds. some of the birds helped mika and her husband find food, and the anaconda made them an axe. ahimbi used it to cut down a tree and make his own canoe; he wanted to be on his own. he traveled about and eventually came back to see his parents. mika was alone, however; unushi had wandered off into the forest and got lost. that night ahimbi slept with his mother and did not wake up soon enough to prevent etsa from seeing them together. in great anger etsa exiled the couple, and they wandered about producing offspring and looking for shelter. the animals were disgusted by their incest, however, and would not help them. unushi, upon learning what mika and his son had done, blamed nantu, beat her, and buried her in a hole. she escaped with auhuês help, but since she was not grateful to him, he still cries in the night for her return. nantu told what had happened to her and the sons of mika, and ahimbi killed unushi. then mika killed the sons for having killed her husband. the struggle between mika and her sons caused thunder, lightning, and violent rain. out of the loudest clap of thunder and a bolt of lightning sprang the fully armed jivaro warrior, masata (war), who from then on stirred up all the people and gods against each other. etsa and nantu blamed ahimbi for the trouble that had come to the earth. etsa imprisoned him under the great falls, where, as indicated by the turbulent waters there, he is still trying to get free. now ahimbi wishes for peace; he sends up sprays of water to make rainbows so etsa will see that he means well. masata, however, always obscures the sign by sending mist or rain to block it. once chingaso came in a canoe wanting to rescue ahimbi, but the snake, not recognizing the goddess, turned over her canoe in the rough water and ate her. so the wars go on.