in the beginning, before there was land·only the sky, flat sea, and fog·two men lived in a sweat house on the water. one of these was the creator, xowalaci; he stayed inside most of the time while his friend sat outside watching. one day the friend saw what looked like land approaching over the sea. it had two trees on it. finally the land struck the sweat house, stopped, and began to expand. the watcher went in and told the creator, but the land was not yet solid, so the creator smoked a pipe. then he blew smoke on the land, which stopped the landês motion and caused the flowers to bloom and grass to grow. the creator made five mud cakes. one of these became a stone; he dropped it into the water and listened for it to reach the bottom. he kept dropping mud cakes until the land came near to the surface. then the waves came; as they receded xowalaci scattered tobacco seed and sand appeared. then the breakers came, again leaving more land. xowalaci stomped on it and it became hard land. the creator saw a manês tracks and knew they meant trouble. he brought the water over the new land to rid it of the man, but the tracks always came back. indeed, there has always been unexpected trouble in the world. now it was time to make people, so xowalaci tried mixing grass and mud and rubbing it. he created a house and placed the two first figures in it. in a few days a dog and a bitch appeared, and later the bitch gave birth to puppies. xowalaci tried adding white sand to the mix to make people, but this time he made snakes. out of some bad dogs he made water monsters. still he could not make people. the creator thought and thought until his friend suggested that he might have a try at creating. he suggested that he smoke the tobacco that night to see if anything would come out of the smoke. after three days of the friendês smoking, a house appeared and soon after that a beautiful woman. the woman was lonely, so xowalaci gave his companion to the woman and proclaimed that their children would be the people. to get the man and woman together, xowalaci made the woman sleep. then the man went to her. in a dream she experienced a man with her, but in the morning there was no man. soon a child was born. the woman longed for the father; she took the child on her back and searched for 10 years for her husband. she neglected the child during the search and he almost died. they returned home and the boy asked where his father was. she explained to her son about the dream. now xowalaci told his friend that the woman was home, and that night the woman wanted her husband badly. when the door opened she saw the man of her dreams. the first family was together. the family had many children, who spoke different languages and formed the different tribes. finally, xowalaci left for the heavens, and the people stayed here.