the kiowa came into the present world by way of a hollow log. the kiowa are a small tribe because a pregnant woman got caught in the log, preventing more people from coming through. the tribe became smaller still when two chiefs fought over the udders of an antelope that had been killed in a hunt. furious, one of the chiefs took his people away and they have never been heard from since. there are spoken of as the azatanhop· the „udder-angry travelers.‰ in the early days there were no horses and the kiowa used dogs to help them carry things. dogs could talk then. there was a wandering man who had been ex- iled from the people. he wounded a bear who ran off. a dog came up to him and warned him that enemies were on the way but that if he would feed her puppies she would save him. the man agreed, and the dog led him to safety. the man went to live in the moun- tains, where they told of a couple who had a beautiful baby who climbed out of her cradle, which was hanging in a tree, and followed a redbird up the tree, which grew and grew until it reached the sky. by then the baby was a beautiful woman. she was greeted by a handsome man who was, in fact, the sun. the woman and the sun married. but the woman missed her people, and one day, after a fight with her hus- band, she dug a hole under a bush that her husband had warned her never to go near. through the hole she could see her people on the earth below. she made a rope and, with her baby son on her back, she started to make her way back to earth. the rope was not long enough, however, and when her husband, the sun, discov- ered her she was hanging far above the earth. furious, the sun sent a ring down the rope to kill his wife. somehow the sunês son made it safely to the earth car- rying the ring that had killed his mother. on earth he was captured by a spider, known by some as spider grandmother. spider grandmother warned the boy never to throw the ring into the sky, so, of course, that is exactly what he did. the ring fell onto his head and broke him in two, forming now two boys·twins in fact. the twins fought and destroyed various monsters and enemies and taught the kiowa many things.