once there was only darkness, and sa (death) lived there with his wife and daughter. sa wanted something more sta- ble, so he used his magic to make a slushy kind of mud sea as a place to live. the god alatangana suddenly appeared·where from, we do not know·and visited sa. alatangana was disgusted by saês life- style and told him so. he decided to do better than sa had done. alatangana first made the slush solid and added animals and plants to it to make it more lively. sa was pleased, and he offered friendship to the god and en- tertained him. when alatangana asked sa for his daughterês hand in marriage, however, he refused. alatangana met the girl secretly, and they eloped to a distant place to avoid the anger of sa. there they produced 14 children: four white boys, four white girls, three black boys, and three black girls. the children all spoke different languages, and their parents could not understand them. this was so upsetting to alatangana and his wife that the god decided he would have to consult his father-in-law, sa. alatangana went to sa and asked his advice. sa was not pleased with his son- in-law, who had eloped with his only daughter, and he admitted that it had been he who had punished the disobedi- ent couple by making it impossible for them to understand their own children. „still,‰ he said, „i will give your white children intelligence and the ability to write, so that they can write down what they want to say. i will give your black children tools so that they may feed and shelter themselves. but the black chil- dren must marry only black people and the white children only whites.‰ alatangana agreed to his father-in- lawês rules, and so began the black and white races and their separation. the peo- ple scattered over the world. the world was still covered in darkness, though, so alatangana had to once again get help from sa, who told two birds how to sing in a way that would bring light. these birds, the tou-tou and the cock, became morning birds, whose songs do indeed bring light. the light came from the sun, whose course sa had fixed. he also arranged the moon and stars for night light. then sa called alatangana to him and demanded a service in return for the gifts he had given. „you have stolen my only child,‰ he said. „now you must give me one of yours whenever i wish it. when i wish to call one of your children i must never be denied. you will know i have called by the sound of the calabash rattle in your dream.‰ so it was that death for us humans was the bride-price for ala- tanganaês marriage.