in the beginning there was only empty space. in that space the creator, kishelamakank, lived. the creator was possessed by a vision of a world, with lakes, rivers, and mountains, forests and plants, and animals of all kinds, a world where there were emotions and wonderful experiences. to make the vision come to life, the creator thought about each of its elements, and these elements gradually began to take form. to help him with his creation, kishelamakank created the great spirits of rock, fire, wind, and water who were also spirits of the four directions. northern grandfather, muxumsa lowanewank, was spirit of the rock. his role in creation was to provide solidity to the creatorês vision. he is winter, but he is also responsible for all of the physical things in our world. eastern grandfather, muxumsa wapanewank, is spring and wind. he is the provider of mental powers, light, and creativity. southern grandmother, homa shawanewank, is summer and the fire that is the sun. it is she who gives us spirit and the possibility of inner growth and energy. finally, muxumsa wunchenewank, western grandfather, is the great water spirit. he is fall and rain and he is death, but he is also renewal and the water·blood·that gives us life. the creator was helped further by father sun, who gave warmth and light, by mother moon, who brought fertility, and by mother earth, who served as the vehicle for life itself. all kinds of things now came into full being: plants, trees, crops, animals of all kinds·all living in harmony. our grandmother moon, nipahuma, feeling lonely, asked the creator for a husband and the creator sent thunder, muxumsa pethakowe, with whose help grandmother moon conceived and then gave birth on earth to the twins·the first humans, a man and a woman·who used their opposite natures to reproduce and who were always watched over at night by their grandmother moon. there were many opposites in creation, because the creator had seen opposites in his original vision. so darkness opposed light, male was balanced by female, and because the spirit manatu opposed the creator, evil worked against good. this was manatu, who made evil to counter goodness; poisonous animals and plants to undermine useful animals and plants. the creator now made the great toad, the spirit kichichaxêkal, to live on earth and to be in charge of balancing the waters. but the toad was challenged and ultimately defeated by the evil horned serpent, maxaêxak. the earth became a place of turmoil, so the creator sent a great flood to cleanse his creation. but there was a good surviving spirit, nanapush, who placed a few humans and animals in his shirt and climbed a cedar tree on top of a mountain to avoid the waters. he then made a raft of the cedar branches and he and his fellow survivors floated on the raft. when the rains stopped, nanapush decided to make use of powers given him by the creator to create a new world. he sent various animals into the depths of the water that covered the old world to find soil for a new world. various animals tried and failed in their dive. finally, the muskrat succeeded and brought up soil in his paws. nanapush placed that soil on the back of taxkwax,