everything in the beginning was empty and quiet. kivish atakvish was the only being. next came whaikut piwkut (whitish gray, unexplained). whaikut piwkut created two objects like great round balls called maikumkush (meaning, something round, not having an end). they lay there three days and then were made alive, brought into being, after which they recognized each other. they were called soimal-um (-um being the plural ending). they were male and female. whaikut piwkut, being the father of these two, left them and was no more seen. the two children (created beings) remained there. when they were by themselves, they quarreled: "i am older than you." "no, i am older than you." each could read the thoughts of the other and this contention continued. the female being said that she was the older. she was kivish atakvish. the male began describing the color of the sky, by this to prove his earlier existence. "see, i am older than you." she got a stone smoking pipe, chahal, and showed it to prove herself the first. he got three kinds of pipes, kalulmul, nyatlumul, and chetmul, and held them up, and thus he silenced her and won (in this contention). then with sighs (guttural breathings used in solemnities), he made her sleep, and after this she knew that she was to be a mother. he was ashamed of his deed, and went up in the sky (i.e., became the sky). he was tukmit, the sky. when she found she was to bring forth, she was making ready. she made the same sort of sighing groans and thereby created a small piece of land. there was no land until then. then the first born of her children, the first people, came forth in the following order. . topal tamyush. double name. topal, ordinary stone grinding mortar; tamyush, sacred toloache bowls of stone; but in this sense tamyush is like an adjective qualifying topal. museums should classify the stone bowls more carefully, differentiating between the two sorts where possible. . kenhut paviut. double name. kenhut, strings of wampum-like beads used for money; paviut, sacred stone knife larger than an arrowhead set on the end of a staff for ceremonial purposes. both of these objects were used as money, that is, carried from one village to the other to pay for the services of those performing the ceremonies. when two words are connected thus in a double term, there is always some such similarity of use, meaning, or purpose. this is a very remarkable peculiarity, more metaphysical than linguistic. . hunwut ashwut. hunwut, bear; ashwut, eagle. the connection is that both belong to chungichnish. these above named were those of the first people who were afterwards sent north, excepting the two latter, which the informant evidently transposed from their proper place, and instead of them there should come here in third position: . kimul chehenish. kimul is the mast with baskets hung on top in the notish ceremony for the dead. the pole is climbed as a contest of skill. if no one can get the baskets, they dig about the pole to make it fall. when the kimul is set up, they sing songs for the dead and dance. they have this ceremony in the north. they never had it here in the mountains. chehenish is the pole before it is painted and hung with baskets. . mahul kwichal. mahul, palm tree; kwichal, spanish bayonet, yucca. these were sent east. . tukvul wekunla. tukvul, carrying net; wekunla, sort of carrying sack. these were sent south. . somal kachamul. meaning unknown. sent south. . makwit awiwunowut. makwit, wild grape; awiwunowut, clematis. sent to the center. . paulovla tovolwish. these were sent east. paulovla is a tall painted mast in the middle of the sacred inclosure used by the indians in the east, who got it from the first people. tovolwish means the color of this painted post. . uutish kahankish. uutish, tree that grows in the east; kahankish, unknown. sent east. . pauhut abahut. pauhut, canoe (also a box hollowed out of a log to keep things in); abahut, cottonwood tree out of which it is made. sent west. . pevesish hoyowish. pevesish, tule; hoyowish, cat-tail rush. sent west. . sanut tanahut. sanut, black asphalt on the seashore; tanahut, sea-weed. sent west. . yuamul tovoymul. yuamul, pine tree; tovoymul, cedar. sent to the center, i.e., where "we" live, the mountain indians. . kwila sukut. kwila, oak with edible acorns; sukut, deer (both used for food). sent to the center. and here should probably come hunut ashwut, in the center instead of to the north. (here belongs the song sung by tomaiyowit, the earth-mother, to make the land larger for her children, as previously given in the description of phonograph record .) the earth-mother sent these first-born of her children to the north, south, east, west, and center. after this everything else was brought forth. the sun came forth at the same time, and as he was there among all the rest of the people, he gave so much light and heat that he nearly killed them all. it would be better to send him away. so they sent him to the east, and in three days he rose in the east. all things were now prepared. before this all had been confusion and disturbance, but now tomaiyowit lay back outstretched, her feet to the north, her head to the south, her right hand to the east, her left hand to the west, and everything became quiet. this ends the first part of the creation story. the earth-mother, when she sent her children to all the four quarters of the world, made feathers for them to wear on their heads. the chief men, the best, quickest and bravest in battle, used to wear them on a long stick high on their heads, and the others wore them close to the head. while the people were traveling along, carrying arrows, they would stop at a pond to play and swim about. ouiot was traveling along with the rest and they did not know anything especial about him. he was like one of the rest. wahawut was a handsome fine-looking woman, with long hair. when she jumped into the water, ouiot was surprised to see that behind she had no flesh on her body, but was flat and thin. he said nothing but was thinking about it. wahawut could read his thoughts, and made her plans to kill him. soon he fell sick. ouiot got sick and said he wanted to see his sons. at this time he acted to the people like a father. before this he had only been a person like the others. now he called for his sons (the first people) from the north to come and see him, and they all tried to cure him. they were like witches then, and could tell by looking at him what was the matter; and they all tried their best to cure him, but could give no help, so they went back north. in the same way the people came in turn from the south, east, west, and center, but could do nothing. tishmel the hummingbird was an important person then and he went to see if he could find out what was the matter. sakapipi, who is now a tiny bird, got up and put his ear to ouiot's heart so that he could hear his breathing, and then he said it was wahawut who was working to kill him by witchcraft. then the people found out that it was wahawut who was doing this; but she had gone down into the mud and water and never was seen. since she began to work against ouiot she stayed there. (no. this is not the place in the story to explain that she was the frog, for she was a person then. they were all people at that time.) ouiot told them that he would not live much longer. "i think i shall die soon," he said, and he mentioned the names of all the months, and each month they waited until the time was u"i may die in this month." when ouiot was sick, he told his people to take him to the hot spring at pawi chawimai (cahuilla), and they took him there, and he bathed in the waters, but did not get any better. on the contrary he grew worse and worse. then they took him to kupa kawima (agua caliente, warner's ranch hot springs), then to paska mahala, a little further on, then to pauma, near pala. when there he died but revived again. they got ready to burn his body, making use of the same sticks with which they clubbed coyote. when he revived again, they took him to malama ekapa (agua tibia), trying all these hot springs to cure him, but they did no good. then they took him to cherukanukna jaquiwuna, near temecula, to the hot spring there. then to etengvo wumoma, hot springs at elsinore, and this was the last place, for he died there. before ouiot died he told chehemal (the kingbird now) that he was going to die, but he said he would come back, and told him that in three days he would rise in the east. kauki chahiwul, something gone that comes again. ovaweleva, something that will come back, disappears and returns. he died in the season soimamul mokat. when he died the people wanted to burn his body, and they sent coyote to the north to the people there to see if he could get fire; but he only went a little way and came back. then they sent him to the people of the east, uutish kahankish, and so on, and in the same way to the people of the west, the south, and the center. each time he went a little further off, and while he was gone sariwut, the bluefly, made the fire with the fire-drill. then coyote came running back yelling and saying: "why do you play such a trick on me? i want to see my father." the people all stood around the fire where only the heart was left unburned, and coyote starting a little way back took a running jump over their heads. wiskun, now a tiny squirrel, the chipmunk, was the strongest man then, and he had gone and brought a log ten men could not lift. ouiot was laid on it. all the body was burned but the bones, after coyote got the heart. when the three days were up, chehemel got on his housetop in the dark and sang and everyone listened. meaning of the song: "ouiot, ouiot is coming. he is coming. i am watching for him, looking to the east. ouiot is coming." pretty soon he did come, as the new moon, moyla achagha. they could just barely see it, a little line. chehemel saw it in the east, but no one else could see it there. the others saw it in the west. before ouiot died, he told them when they saw him, the new moon, in the west, they should get together and make races (as an answer to the moon, giving their spirits to it). if they made these races, and shouted at this time, they would live longer. (this means that as a part of the chungichnish ceremonial, obedience is required, and reward or punishment promised for that or the reverse, as in all the chungichnish instruction.) after this they always made these races. salvador remembers them, sixty years or so ago, when he was a boy. the chief men who had charge of these things would know when the new moon was expected and would watch for it. then they would get ready, and just as soon as the moon appeared one man would start a fire and shout, and all would come together. they would shout three times, and then all start together in a straight line, side by side, and run until the fastest runner got ahead of the others, when he cut across in front of them, and that was the end of it. there might be from twenty to fifty who did the running. they made the indescribable guttural invocation to send their spirits to the moon, and they had to have a fire as they did in every religious ceremony. the head men always started the fire, and the long ceremonial pipes they smoked were lighted at it. at the time ouiot died he did not talk much, but only told them about the races they should have. but after he died the people held a council, and talked it over among themselves to decide what they could do. some of the people had gone north, south, east, and west, and some had gone up in the sky or down in the ground. so they considered what they could do. some thought they could do the same as ouiot, die for a time and then come back; but they could not do this. some thought the deer would be good to eat. they could kill him and have a gathering and have that meat to eat. they spoke to deer about it, but he said, no. he was a shaman and very powerful. he had something in his nose like the black asphalt on the seashore, and this would protect him. they gave up killing him when he said that. then they laid on the ground one of the sacred stones, wiala, enormous crystals, and said they could kill him with them. but deer said, no, he had some of that too, and they could not kill him with them. then they laid down one of the eagle-feather skirts, pahlut, and said they could kill him with that. he said, no, he had some of that too. then they put down tobacco, pivat, and said they could kill him with that. deer said, no, he had some of that too, and they could not kill him with that. then they laid down some "wild bamboo," the kind that grows at warner's ranch and they use for arrows, huikish, and said they could kill him with that. he showed them that the bones in his nostrils were like that, and said they could not kill him with it. then they laid down arrows already made with flint points fastened to them; so then he had no more to say. he gave uso they killed him with bow and arrows, and ever since the people have used them to kill the deer; and they skinned him and took the bones of the leg for awls to make baskets. they gave them to wahawut,—not the one that killed ouiot,—and she made a good-sized basket in which to collect the bones of ouiot, and after that they always used the baskets in ceremonies. and they killed other animals besides the deer. they killed acorns,—they were people then,—and killed all that they now have to eat. these turned into animals and seeds, acorns and plants. eagle was a big man, a great "hechicero," then, and they told him they would kill him to have ceremonies. but he said, no, it was not right. he was a person of importance. when they told eagle they were going to kill him, he thought he could get away from them, for he was very wise and knew a great deal. so he went north, thinking that from there he could get entirely away from this world, reach its limits and fly away; and he tried it everywhere, but could not do it. he thought he could live forever and keep away from death, but there was death, pikmakvul, wherever he went. then he went east and did the same thing, and south and west the same, and then he came home to the center and stayed there. he had to die. there was no death before this time. by this time the people's council was concluded. wahawut had finished her basket. she had been working all the while and had lost no time. so they gathered the bones and put them in the basket to carry them, and they put the bones into a stone mortar and ground them, and added water and made it into a kind of mush. when all was well mixed they made a hole in the ground and poured it into the hole and buried it. the crushed bones were not contained in any vessel. they made the solemn guttural invocation with waving motions to the north and all the other points of the compass, to send ouiot's spirit up to the sky; and since then the people do the same thing when they have the ceremonies for the dead. when the people scattered from the place where ouiot died, all the tribes had names, but many are dead and few living. he does not know the name of this tribe. these indians (the luiseños) are called by themselves western indians. when they scattered, the people traveled about, two or three families together, and they claimed the places where they stopped for a time, and a great deal of fighting came from this. other groups coming after would occupy the land claimed by the first. the la jolla people would fight the potrero people. a man could not go from la jolla to san jacinto without being killed by some enemy.