in the beginning mangala (god) made the balaza seed. this seed did not work well, however, so he made two kinds of eleusine seeds and other pairs of seeds that would become the four directions, the four elements, and all of the things that organize creation. there were also seeds for two pairs of twins, each set made up of a male and female; these would become the first people. all of the seeds were together in godês egg, the world egg. one of the male twins, pemba, thought he could take dominion over creation, so he left the egg before his time. he fell through space until a part of his placenta became the earth. god made the other half the sun. pemba was not pleased with the barren earth, however, and he tried to return to the egg. this was not possible, but pemba did steal some male seeds from god. these he planted in the earth; an act of incest, because earth was made from his placenta and, therefore, from his own mother. one of the seeds, an eleusine, took root in the placentaês blood and came out red. the incest made the earth impure. meanwhile, back in heaven, the male twin called faro, who took the form of a fish, was sacrificed to atone for pembaês sin. his body was cut into 60 pieces, which became trees on earth; symbols of resurrection. then mangala brought faro back to life, gave him human form, and sent him to earth on an ark made of the primordial sacred placenta, the mother of all. the ark landed on mount kouroula in the land of mande, which means son of the fish. this was the world mountain. faro stood tall on the ark; he had the original eight ancestors with him and all the first animals and plants. like faro, all the first beings contained the male and female life force in balance. the first beings watched the first sunrise from the ark. then the ancestor of bards, sourakata, descended from heaven with the first sacred drum; the skull of the sacrificed faro. he played on the drum to bring rain. no rain fell, so the primordial smith came down and struck a rock with his hammer, bringing rain. now the twin fish (symbolizing faro and faroês son) came down, too. this is why the mannogo fish is sacred to the mande. in the time that followed, faro created the world as we know it out of mangalaês original egg seeds and their descendants. the first people continued the planting and built sanctuaries. faro struggled against the evil force represented by pemba, his evil brother. faro, who is also the niger river (his head is lake debo), is fertility itself, containing the male and female life forces. faro flooded all of the land containing the impure seed of his brother. only the good were saved in faroês ark, and he taught them proper ways and how to make and keep the shrines.