at frst, our world didn’t contain any earth or soil, everything was covered with water, they say. ten xurmast tenger sent a galbingaa bird to our world. tat bird was thirty-thousand years old. afer ten-thousand years, it laid an egg, they say. ten the galbingaa bird didn’t fnd any dry land on which to place its egg, so it few and it few above the orb of the water until it fnally plucked out its own feathers to make a nest on top of the water. on top of the nest, as the bird sat there, the gathered dust turned into soil. afer thirty-thousand years, from the egg that had emerged, there came all sorts of beings, and at the very end of that there emerged a man. and that is how our earth, covered with soil, came to be. at frst there was no ground, there was fre and water, and wind, all mixed up together. ten buddha took some soil, and put it down on the water, and then there was the earth, and plants, trees began to grow and spread, they say. ten buddha made man too. although they say that then buddha became the largest star of the constellation known as the seven gods. they say that šagžtüv burqan made the ground and the earth. at frst there was no earth, there was an ocean of water everywhere, so burqan took a pinch of soil from the heavens and he came and sprinkled it, and so our world came into being. and then on the earth there came to be grass and plants, animals for hunting, and people. te frst people had hair all over their bodies, but burqan didn’t like this, so he lef hair only on their heads, their eyebrows, their beards, their temples, and he plucked all the rest. ten he lef a little hair remaining on the armpits and the groins of people. afer, šagžtüv looked for a place where there would be a woman with a child, he found one, and so people came into being. te frst man did not listen to the word of god, so in response to his sinful deeds, burhan punished him. te frst man could bend his legs at the knee going forward, and so he could run much faster than any animal. as a punishment, though, his legs then bent backwards, and a man could only move very slowly and sluggishly. te frst man was unbelievably tall, and lived to a long age. today, though, his bones grow weak, his body grows small, and his age grows short, they say. at the end of time, a man will live to only seven years of age, a child born yesterday will reach maturity tomorrow, the horse he rides will be as big as a rabbit, and a man will never be taller than his own elbow, they say. at that time three suns emerged, and the earth became very hot, there remained only the mountains and the ridges. afer raging fres there fell leaden rain, the mountains and the ridges became fattened out and everywhere was lava ash. ten the wind wasn’t blowing, so the earth settled down. two whales and one frog had just gotten free, and so there remained only the empty space where they had been. as for how long this time lasted, not a single person knows. at the end of this epoch, maidar burqan came and made some earth and some soil again. so it’s on the backs of those two whales and the frog, who now hold up our world, that the world was frst created. how the mountains and water came to be a long time ago, a female goddess had son and he died. te goddess was sitting and crying and her tears became a river and they began to fow. another god was just then going around the world, circling around it. in order to dam up the fowing river of tears, the god transformed the woman into a mountain as she was sitting there, they say. te plants and trees that grew from the mountain are the hair of the goddess, and the fowing rivers are the tears of the goddess. te origin of the universe and man in an ancient time, in the golden world, there were no people or no animals, there was just something fat and blank. in this time, there were only the older and younger sisters, moon and sun, the two. sun said to moon: “you go around during the day. i’ll go around during the night.” to this, the moon grumbled: “no way, during the day there are so many people about. you go around during the day. it would be shameful for me to be going about during the day.” “fine then, i’ll go around during the day, you go around during the night,” said the sun. te earth was completely empty, there was no water, no trees, no plants, no hills or mountains, so it was very boring for the moon and sun. tat’s why there had to be human beings in the world. so then šagžtüv burqan made man and women, the two. from the woman, a kind of stomach like thing protruded. šagžtüv burqan cut open that stomach, chopped it into many pieces, and the pieces turned into many small children; he dispersed them in all directions, saying: “you settle in this area, and you settle in that one,” he said, and he sent them to all diferent kinds of places. afer that, šagžtüv and maidar, the two, placed a bet to see in whose vase the fower would blossom frst. ten when in šagžtüv’s vase the fower blossomed, maidar opened his eyes, took the fower, and put it in his vase, and said: “oh, šagžtüv! look—in my vase the fower has blossomed,” he said. because šagžtüv was a mild and gentle burhan, he pretended he hadn’t seen anything, and he said: “ah, that’s good, the next eon will be yours. but in your eon, people will be liars and thieves,” he said. how the sun came to be in the time when there was no sun and no moon, from the bodies of people, sparks few, and they went fying around the heavens. ten one of them became ill. tey say that burhan sent a healing lama to look for medicine. te lama took up his narrow cane that was ten-thousand alds long, and, searching and sweeping the outer oceans beyond this zamba tiiv, found a medicine, turned around, and few across the heavens. when the lama found the sick man, and healed him, in the heavens, burqan made a mirror of golden color radiate light. tis mirror became the sun that is in the heavens now, they say. afer this time, the sparks ceased to fy from the body of human beings—they became the light of the sun that nourishes the life of mankind, they say. sun and man, the two in ancient times, man’s body was full of light, when one man was born, a fruit-bearing tree began to grow, they say. each human being was flled with light, and each lived by eating the fruit of his own tree. ten, because from one of these trees, fruit was stolen, and it was the very frst thef, an act of deflement had occurred. ten it happened that all kinds of trees became without fruit, and the being known as man became without light. because of this, burhan gathered up all the light of those many people, and made the sun and the moon. because man gave the sun its light, he worships the sun, and he lives protected by the sunlight, they say.