once there was a place in the sky where people lived in perfect harmony and peace. houses were oriented east to west in accordance with the rising and setting sun. in one of the houses a woman lived with a special man who needed protection because of his mysterious powers. the man, however, became sick and died·a phenomenon previously unknown in this sky world. the people placed the man in a container for burial. before long the woman was seen to be pregnant, but she did not reveal the father. when her time came she gave birth to a girl and named her aientsik (earth) who grew quickly. one day aientsik began to cry uncontrollably. only when she stood in front of the burial container of the dead man·actually her father·did she stop crying. she talked to the spirit of her father for hours at a time, and one day she told her mother that she was to marry. in preparation, her mother packed a basket of cornbread and berries and aientsik, as directed by her father spirit, left to find the place where tharonhaiwakon (sky supporter) lived. when she got there the girl gave tharonhaiwakon the basket of food and stayed with him for three days and nights. soon the man became sick. he brought aientsik to a special tree· the tree of light·and told her to lift it out of the ground. he knew this would make him feel better. the girl uprooted the tree, exposing an opening through which she looked. as she leaned over, tharaonhaiwakon pushed her into the hole and she began to fall, grabbing roots of beans, corn and squash on the way through the hole. now aientsik fell and fell into the darkness below the sky world until finally she saw a vast expense of water below with animals floating about in it. the loon looked up and saw the falling woman·sky woman, as they called her. he asked the turtle to let her fall on his back, and the flying animals went up to help guide her to her landing place. aientsik knew that the animals would need dirt to form a world, so she asked them to dive for some. several animals tried but failed to find the dirt. finally muskrat succeeded and placed a small amount of dirt on turtleês back. as each day aientsik circled turtleês back, the dirt grew into more land, and gradually the roots she had brought with her from the upper world began to give forth plants in the new earth. these plants were corn, beans, and squash, the staple food of the mohawks. 