the first world, an island floating in the endless oceans, domed by the hoganlike sky and secured by the four directions, was populated by the insect people. they really were more like insects than what we think of as people. morning for them was when white came up in the east and day was blue in the south. evening was yellow in the west, and night was black in the north. the gods of the insect people lived in the surrounding seas·these were water monster in the east, blue heron in the south, frog in the west, and white mountain thunder in the north. the insect people were quarrelsome. they recognized no sexual taboos and paid no attention to the warnings of their gods. the gods told them to leave the first world and forced them to do so by creating a great flood, which covered the first world. the insect people flew up to the hard sky; through a hole in the east they entered the second world, which was blue. the second world was populated by the swallow people, who lived in strange rough houses with holes in their tops. after searching the world in vain for people like themselves, the insect people made friends with the swallow people and lived with them. one day an insect sexually assaulted a swallow, however, and once again the insects were expelled from a world. led by the locust, they flew to the top of the second world, until nilchêi, the wind, appeared and told them how to find in the south the entrance to the third world, which was yellow. in the third world, the insect people discovered the grasshopper people, who lived in holes in the ground. after searching in vain for people like themselves, they befriended the grasshoppers and lived with them. as in the second world, however, they upset the harmony by way of sexual assault and once again they were ordered to leave. they flew up to the sky, and after searching for an exit, they were led to an opening in the west. the fourth world was black and white. there was no sun, moon, or stars, and no real day. there were four mountains·one on the horizon of each of the directions. there did not seem to be inhabitants, but locust scouts reported that they had in fact found people in the north who lived in houses and who grew things in fields. these were the pueblo people, the kisani, who visited the insect people and offered them kindness and food. the insect people vowed among themselves not to make the mistake here that they had made in the other worlds, and things went well for quite a time. then they were visited for four days in succession by four strange beings who made incomprehensible signs. these were white body, blue body, yellow body, and black body. on the fourth day, black body explained to the insect people that the gods wished to make more people, but ones that looked like themselves, without the odd appendages and foul smells of the insect people. black body instructed the insects to bathe themselves and await the return of the gods in 12 days. the insect people bathed themselves on the morning of the twelfth day and dried themselves with corn meal·white for males, yellow for females. then the gods called out as they approached, appearing on the fourth call. blue body and black body carried buckskin, while white body and yellow body carried one yellow and one white ear of corn. the gods performed a sacred ceremony during which supernatural mirage people appeared, the yellow ear of corn became a woman, and the white ear of corn became a man. the wind came and gave breath to these beings. the gods instructed the insects to make a brush hogan for first man and first woman, who lived together as husband and wife. after four days, first woman gave birth to hermaphrodite twins. after four more days she produced another set, a boy and a girl. five sets of twins in all were born, and in each case they became fully grown in four days and, except for the hermaphrodites, each set lived together as husband and wife. first man, first woman, and each set of twins were taken at four-day intervals to the home of the gods in the east and were taught the mysteries of life, including witchcraft. they were taught how to wear masks in certain ceremonies and how to pray for necessities. they learned to impersonate the talking god, the house god, and many others. they also learned to keep their incestuous marriages secret, to marry outside of their own immediate family, and to marry among the insect people. soon they inhabited the land. they built dams and planted fields, like the kisani. one of the hermaphrodite twins invented pottery, the other the wicker water bottle. the people also learned to hunt, and with the help of the gods they learned to use deer heads as masks to make the hunt more successful. one day the sky (father sky) and the earth (mother earth) seemed to slam together, and when they separated, coyote and badger appeared. coyote hung about the peopleês farm, and badger went into the hole to the lower world. the kisani chief taught the people about the four sacred mountains· mount blanca in the east, mount taylor in the south, the san francisco peaks in the west, and mount hesperus (navajo mountain) in the north. then the people began to quarrel. first woman accused first man of being lazy and of only working in order to have the pleasure of her vagina. „we do not need you men,‰ said first woman. so it was that the men and women separated and lived on opposite sides of the river. the men persuaded the kisani people· men and women·to come to their side, and they took all their tools with them. during the first winter both sides did well. the men worked hard to provide for themselves in their new place, and the women lived on the stores of the old settlement. the women sometimes came to the river and teased the men. over the next years, the fields of the men did well, and the women slacked off. soon the women were starving and they no longer taunted the men across the river. many tried to swim across and were aken by water monster. finally, the men allowed the women to cross over, and after cleansing ceremonies the men and women came together again. two young girls were taken by water monster on the way over. with the help of the gods and their mysterious ceremonies, the people went under the waters and found the lost children with water monster and two of his own children in the north room of many colors. the people were allowed to take their children, but coyote, who had descended with them, stole the children of water monster. since coyote always kept his robe closely wrapped around him, he was able to conceal his theft from the people, but the wrath of water monster was not hidden. soon a great flood came. the people were protected from the flood only at the last minute. a strange old man and his son appeared and hid them in a huge reed. since turkey was at the bottom of the reed, his tail feathers got wet at the tip and turned white, as they remain today. the people sent scouts to the sky to seek a means of escape from the fourth world. it was locust who finally succeeded in digging through to the fifth world, but the water followed the people up the reed and began to enter the fifth world, too. only when the children of water monster were discovered and thrown down the hole did the waters subside. after the flood, the people looked about for food. the kisani had brought some corn kernels, and some of the people threatened to take the new corn. eventually the kisani, the pueblo people, and the people (the dine) went their own ways. first man, first woman, black body, and blue body then made the world of dinehtah. they reestablished the sacred mountains, made male rain (hard rain) and female rain (soft rain), and brought up the gods from the fourth world. finally, they made the sun and moon, and there was light in the fifth world.