in the beginning the earth was covered in water and every place was dark. only water animals lived down here. the spirits lived in the world above with the great spirit. there was a huge apple tree there with deep roots. it happened that one day the great spirit uprooted the tree, leaving a great hole in the ground of the upper world. he ordered his daughter to look down through the hole at the dark, watercovered lower world and he asked her to go there. he picked his daughter up and dropped her through the hole. slowly sky woman, as she was now called, floated down towards the world below, shining like a star. the water animals looked up, afraid. at first they hid under the water, but then they came back up and decided they would need a dry place on which sky woman could land. beaver dove into the depths to find soil but drowned in the process. the loon and others failed, too. finally the muskrat dove, and though he resurfaced dead, he had some mud in his paw. the animals placed the bit of mud on the turtleês back and immediately the turtle and the earth on his back grew into what is now north america. meanwhile, swans flew up to catch the falling sky woman and they brought her safely to the new earth. almost immediately she gave birth to twins; one was good and the other was so bad that his mother died trying to give birth to him. the good twin, or good spirit, as he is called, hung his motherês head in the sky as the sun. he also used parts of her body to become the moon and stars. the rest of her body he buried, making the earth itself sacred and fertile. but for every good thing the good spirit did, his evil brother, the bad spirit, did the opposite. the good spirit made beautiful plants and the evil spirit put thorns and knots on them. the evil spirit countered his brotherês deer and bear with poisonous snakes, his beautiful rivers with rocks to cause dangerous rapids. finally, the good spirit made humans out of clay, and the evil spirit mocked that creation by creating monkeys. the good spirit now placed a protective power over his whole creation and ordered his brother to respect the protection. when the evil spirit refused, the good spirit challenged him to a fight; the winner to rule the world. after many days of brutal fighting, the good spirit prevailed and condemned his brother to a dark underground cave. unfortunately, however, the evil spiritês servants come up to this world and cause problems, especially by making humans do evil things. this is why all of us can be evil as well as good.