one day madumda decided to make the world. he wanted advice from his older brother, kuksu, so he plucked hairs from his head and asked them to lead him to where kuksu was. he held up the hairs to each of the four directions, and it was to the south they flew. madumda followed them on his cloud and spent the time smoking his pipe until he got to kuksuês house. there, as is proper, the brothers smoked the pipe four times before speaking. then madumda scraped skin from his armpit, rolled it up, and gave it to kuksu, who placed it between his toes. kuksu took some skin from his armpit, rolled it up, and gave it to madumda, who placed it between his toes. each blew four times on his little ball of skin, and then the two gods mixed the two balls with a little of their hair. they stood up and faced the four directions and the up and down, then proclaimed the creation to come. madumda took the ball and left as kuksu sang the ancient creation song for the first time. madumda sang, too, as he flew home on his cloud, with the ball strung through his earlobe. then he slept for eight days, during which time the ball grew and became the earth. madumda awoke and threw it into the air. then he smoked his pipe and threw it, burning, into the sky, where it became the sun. in the new light he walked about creating things as we know them·the mountains, trees, valleys, rocks, lakes, seas, plants, animals, and so forth. by rolling the earth one way and then another, he made night and day. one day he decided to make the people. first he made some stubby little people out of rocks, then some beautiful longhaired people out of his hair. he made some bird people out of feathers and some hairy deer people out of his armpit hair. in fact, he made all kinds of people out of all kinds of material. finally he made naked people like us out of little pieces of sinew planted between some hills. madumda gave these people their land and taught them how to eat and live. in time the people began to misbehave, killing each other and not caring well enough for their children, so madumda sent a great flood to get rid of them. when they were all gone madumda wished for a village and there was one. he filled this village with people from his thoughts, but these people also went bad, so madumda sent a great fire to destroy them. then he made new people out of willow wands. he taught them how to hunt with bows and arrows, how to make baskets, and how to eat before he went away to his northern home. these people also went bad and had to be destroyed·this time by ice. then he made another willow wand batch of people and went away again. after a time he was amazed to learn in his dream that these people, too, were all wrong. kuksu advised madumda to destroy these people with wind, which he did. only the ground squirrel escaped in his hole. madumda made new people out of willow wands. this time he made many groups that spoke different languages. he taught them their dances and ceremonies and he taught them how to behave and how to eat, weave, hunt, and grow things. he ordered the coyotes to watch over the villages. he also gave all of the animals their particular places. finally, he left the world, warning the people to behave properly. this is our last chance.