there was a time when water was ev- erywhere and was populated by ducks, loons, other water birds, turtle, and toad. in those days, the people lived in the sky with the great chief. one day the chiefês daughter fell sick and began to die. a wise man learned in a dream that she should be placed next to a tree and that the tree should then be dug up. he told the chief about his dream, and the chief followed the dreamês instructions. then a man came along who resented the digging up of the tree and kicked the girl into the hole. suddenly she was floating down through space. seeing what was happening, the birds rose and formed a soft net with their wings and caught the girl. when they got tired, they put her on turtleês back, but he got tired too. the birds realized the girl would need some- thing to rest on, so toad dove down to the bottom of the waters and brought back a bit of soil. she placed it on turtleês back, where it began to grow. turtleês back grew, too. soon there was the earth for the girl to live on. she was happy there; she made a little house, and soon she produced a baby girl. the woman and the girl worked the land. soon the daughter had twin boys, flint (othagwenda) and sap- ling (juskaha). sky woman did not like othagwenda, so she put him in a tree. she taught juskaha how to make things and hunt. soon she noticed that he would come home without his bow and arrows. it seems he was giving them to the twin in the tree. finally he brought his twin home with him. they stayed there together for a long time. then they decided to enlarge the earth. othagwenda made mosquito and rough land. mosquito was huge and could even chop down trees. juskaha was horrified. „this is a terrible animal; he might kill the people we plan to create,‰ he said, and he rubbed the animal down to his present size. as for othagwenda, he did not like his brotherês creations·big fat animals, rich syrup-dripping maples. „these animals must be made harder to catch,‰ he said. he made the animals thinner and faster, and then made the maples drip sap that had to be boiled into syrup. finally, the two brothers fought. juskaha killed othagwenda, but it was too late for the good brother to change the bad brotherês work.