there was a world before this world, but the people in it did not know how to behave themselves or how to act human. the creating power was not pleased with that earlier world. he said to himself: “i will make a new world.” he had the pipe bag and the chief pipe, which he put on the pipe rack that he had made in the sacred manner. he took four dry buffalo chips, placed three of them under the three sticks, and saved the fourth one to light the pipe. the creating power said to himself:“l will sing three songs, which will bring a heavy rain. then i’ll sing a fourth song and stamp four times on the earth, and the earth will crack wide open. water will come out of the cracks and cover the land.” when he sang the first song, it started to rain. when he sang the second, it poured. when he sang the third, the rain-swollen rivers overflowed their beds. but when he sang the fourth song and stamped on the earth, it split open in many places like a shattered gourd, and water flowed from the cracks until it covered everything. the creating power floated on the sacred pipe and on his huge pipe bag. he let himself be carried by waves and wind this way and that, drifting for a long time. at last the rain stopped, and by then all the people and animals had drowned. only kangi, the crow, survived, though it had no place to rest and was very tired. flying above the pipe,“tunkasllila, grandfather, i must rest soon”; and three times the crow asked him to make a place for it to light. the creating power thought: “it’s time to unwrap the pipe and open the pipe bag.” the wrapping and the bag contained all manner of animals and birds, from which he selected four animals known for their ability to stay under water for a long time. first he sang a song and took the loon out of the bag. he commanded the loon to dive and bring up a lump of mud. the loon did dive, but it brought up nothing. “i dived and dived but couldn’t reach bottom,” the loon said. “i almost died. the water is too deep.” the creating power sang a second song and took the otter out of the bag. he ordered the otter to dive and bring up some mud. the sleek otter at once dived into the water, using its strong webbed feet to go down, down, down. it was submerged for a long time, but when it finally came to the surface, it brought nothing. taking the beaver out of the pipe’s wrapping, the creating power sang a third song. he commanded the beaver to go down deep below the water and bring some mud. the beaver thrust itself into the water, using its great flat tail to propel itself downward. it stayed under water longer than the others, but when it finally came up again, it too brought nothing. at last the creating power sang the fourth song and took the turtle out of the bag. the turtle is very strong. among our people it stands for long life and endurance and the power to survive. a turtle heart is great medicine, for it keeps on beating a long time after the turtle is dead. “you must bring the mud,” the creating power told the turtle. it dove into the water and stayed below so long that the other three animals shouted: “the turtle is dead; it will never come up again!” all the time, the crow was flying around and begging for a place to light. after what seemed to be eons, the turtle broke the surface of the water and paddled to the creating power. “i got to the bottom!” the turtle cried. “i brought some earth!” and sure enough, its feet and claws—even the space in the cracks on its sides between its upper and lower shell—were filled with mud. scooping mud from the turtle’s feet and sides, the creating power began to sing. he sang all the while that he shaped the mud in his hands and spread it on the water to make a spot of dry land for himself. when he had sung the fourth song, there was enough land for the creating power and for the crow. “come down and rest,” said the creating power to the crow, and the bird was glad to. then the creating power took from his bag two long wing feathers of the eagle. he waved them over his plot of ground and commanded it to spread until it covered everything. soon all the water was replaced by earth. "water without earth is not good," thought the creating power, "but land without water is not good either." feeling pity for the land, he wept for the earth and the creatures he would put upon it, and his tears became oceans, streams and lakes. "that's better," he thought. out of his pipe bag the creating power took all kinds of animals, birds, plants and scattered them over the land. when he stamped on the earth, they all came alive. from the earth the creating power formed the shapes of men and women. he used red earth and white earth, black earth and yellow earth, and made as many as he thought would do for a start. he stamped on the earth and the shapes came alive, each taking the color of the earth out of which it was made. the creating power gave all of them understanding and speech and told them what tribes they belonged to. the creating power said to them: "the first world i made was bad; the creatures on it were bad. so i burned it up. the second world i made was bad too, so i drowned it. this is the third world i have made. look: i have created a rainbow for you as a sign that there will be no more great flood. whenever you see a rainbow, you will know that it has stopped raining." the creating power continued: "now, if you have learned how to behave like human beings and how to live in peace with each other and with the other living things—the two-legged, the four-legged, the man-legged, the fliers, the no-legs, the green plants of this universe—then all will be well. but if you make this world bad and ugly, then i will destroy this world too. it's up to you.” the creating power gave the people the pipe. “live by it,” he said. he named this land the turtle continent because it was there that the turtle came up with the mud out of which the third world was made. “someday there might be a fourth world,” the creating power thought. then he rested.