there always was god; god is beyond birth and death. he creates by merely speaking. so he said, „let there be light,‰ and, of course, there was light. god was so pleased with this light that he made some of it enter his prophet, mohammed. after god had made mohammedês soul, he was so pleased with it that he decided to create humans so mohammed could go to them as a prophet and teacher. god knew everything that would ever happen, so he began creating things to fulfill the mysterious purpose that hid behind his knowledge. he made the throne of heaven·his throne, the throne of the last judgment·and sat it upon the magnificent carpet he made; a carpet of every imaginable color that is huge beyond conception. good souls live forever in joy in the shadow of the carpet under the throne of heaven. then god created the mother of books, a book with a soul of her own and one that is full of godês wisdom and the great secrets of life. god created the pen with which to write down his commandments. the pen is huge beyond comprehension and has a conscious being. it has been writing down the history of mankind since it was given life by god. then god created the trumpet and the archangel serafili (asrafel) to blow it at doomsday. god also made the garden of delights, a land of milk and honey, a paradise for good souls. he created the fire for the eternal punishment of souls who would not heed his messenger, mohammed. he created the angels, the most important of whom was jiburili (gabriel), so full of godês radiance that even mohammed fainted when he saw him in his original form. there were also the archangels zeraili (azrafel, the angel of death), maliki (michael, the angel of fire), and many others. god created the cock of heaven; his crow can be heard in the crowing of all the barnyard cocks that wake us each morning for the first prayers. this is how god created the world: he rolled out the sky and placed the sun, moon, stars, and planets in it and set things to run according to the patterns we know. he made the universe of seven heavens, each with its own planet. these heavens are watched over by the souls of eight prophets: adam, isa (jesus), yahya (john the baptist), yusufu (joseph), idrisi (enoch), haruni (aron), musa (moses), and in the highest heaven the ancient prophet abraham, whose soul stands by the celestial mosque and its 70,000 praying angels. each heaven has its opposite hell; the farthest one away from the creator is for the unbelievers. god spread out the carpet of earth, with its infinite variety of forms and shapes·seas, islands, mountains, valleys, trees, plants, deserts, insects, birds, fish, and animals. all the creatures have their own ways of praising god. god taught the creatures the laws of nature·how the big animals eat the small, and so forth. god created time, too. finally he called together the angels, and after the morning prayers, he spoke to them of his intention to create a being with their intelligence but made of clay. the angels had their doubts, and god let them speak. they saw the specter of sin and war over the earth, but god reassured them; everything would work out according to his mysterious plan. the angels therefore agreed and sang godês praise. now god took clay and made adam, whose name means earth. he gave adam life by speaking, „life.‰ adam shuddered and came alive, and his first words were in praise of god. 