at the beginning of creation the 22 letters of the hebrew alphabet appeared before the creator, each hoping to be chosen as the beginning of his first word. god chose beth, spoke the word baruch („blessed‰), and so began his work with a blessing. on day one god made the heavens and day and night. when he threw a huge stone into the emptiness that surrounded him it became the earth. on day two god created the angels, on day three the plants and the cedars of lebanon as well as the material on earth with which to make axes to cut down the cedars if they became too tall and proud. on that day he also created eden paradise for his future first humans and for the righteous after death. on the fourth day god created the heavenly bodies. the fifth day was for sea and air creatures, including leviathan and zinn, and on the sixth day he created the beasts. when, that day, god discussed the creation of humans with the angels, some of them were not pleased, seeing the new humans as rivals. in anger, god caused these angels to be consumed by fire. he then sent the angel gabriel to collect soil from the four corners of the world. god planned to use this soil to create his humans. the earth resisted gabrielês attempts to collect the soil because the earth knew that the future humans would despoil it. but god reached down and took the soil with which to make adam (adamah), the first man, and he planned to give the new body a soul. but the angel samael (satan) and his followers complained about a being other than themselves·a being made of lowly dirt·being allowed to have a soul. once again god became angry, and he threw satan and his companions into hell. then god created adam and breathed life into him. some say he appeared to be about 20 years old. adam noticed that all of the animals had mates, but he was alone. so, to satisfy him god created lilith out of soil, too. but lilith insisted upon making love on top of adam rather than allowing him to be on top of her as he wished, and when adam complained she scorned his desire to place himself above her in any way since they were both equally made of dust. after speaking the name of god she disappeared to live among demons. now god, sympathizing with adam, made eve for him. adam ruled over the male beasts in the east and north while eve ruled the females of the south and west. adam and eve were happy, living without clothes but for shoulder bands bearing the name of god. but satan and lilith had other plans for them.