 the revelation of the mysteries hidden in silence prologue one day john, the brother of james , was going up to the temple. a pharisee by the name of arimanios came up to him and challenged him, asking: "where is the teacher you used to follow?" john replied, "he has gone back to the place from which he came." the pharisee said, "that nazarene misled you (plural), told you lies, closed your hearts and turned you away from your ancestral traditions.” when i heard these things, i, john, turned away from the temple and went off to a deserted mountainous place. i was very unhappy, saying to myself: "how was the savior designated? why did his father send him into the world? who is his father? what kind of realm will we go to? for, although he told us, ‘this realm is modeled on the imperishable realm,’ he didn't teach us about the latter.” all of a sudden, while i was contemplating these things, behold! the heavens opened and the whole of creation shone with a light from above, and the world quaked! i was afraid, yet behold! a little child appeared before me in the light. i continued looking at him as he became an old man and then he changed again, becoming like a young man. i didn't understand what i was seeing, but the one likeness had several forms in the light, and these likenesses appeared each through the other and the vision had three forms. he said to me, “john, why doubt? why be afraid? don’t you know this image? be not afraid. i am with you (plural) always. i am the father the mother the son i am the incorruptible purity. i have come to teach you about what is and what was and what will be in order for you to understand the invisible world and the world that is visible and the immovable race of perfect humanity. raise your head; understand my lessons; share them with any others who have received the spirit, who are from the immovable race of perfect humanity.” the inexpressible one the one rules all. nothing has authority over it. it is the god. it is father of everything, holy one the invisible one over everything. it is uncontaminated pure light no eye can bear to look within. the one is the invisible spirit. it is not right to think of it as a god or as like god. it is more than just god. nothing is above it. nothing rules it. since everything exists within it it does not exist within anything. since it is not dependent on anything it is eternal. it is absolutely complete and so needs nothing. it is utterly perfect light. the one is without boundaries nothing exists outside of it to border it the one cannot be investigated nothing exists apart from it to investigate it the one cannot be measured nothing exists external to it to measure it the one cannot be seen for no one can envision it the one is eternal for it exists forever the one is inconceivable for no one can comprehend it the one is indescribable for no one can put any words to it. the one is infinite light purity holiness stainless, the one is incomprehensible perfectly free from corruption. not “perfect” not “blessed” not “divine” but superior to such concepts. neither physical nor unphysical neither immense nor infinitesimal it is impossible to specify in quantity or quality for it is beyond knowledge. the one is not a being among other beings it is vastly superior but it is not “superior.” it is outside of realms of being and time for whatever is within realms of being was created and whatever is within time had time allotted to it the one receives nothing from anything. it simply apprehends itself in its own perfect light the one is majestic. the one is measureless majesty chief of all realms producing all realms light producing light life producing life blessedness producing blessedness knowledge producing knowledge good producing goodness mercy producing mercy generous producing generosity it gives forth light beyond measure, beyond comprehension. his realm is eternal, peaceful, silent, resting, before everything. he is the head of every realm sustaining each of them through goodness. the origin of reality the father is surrounded by light. he apprehends himself in that light . he is conscious of his image everywhere around him, perceiving his image in this spring of spirit pouring forth from himself. he is enamored of the image he sees in the light-water, the spring of pure light-water enveloping him. his self-aware thought (ennoia) came into being. appearing to him in the effulgence of his light. she stood before him. this, then, is the first of the powers, prior to everything. arising out of the mind of the father the providence (pronoia) of everything. her light reflects his light. she is from his image in his light perfect in power image of the invisible perfect virgin spirit. she is the initial power glory of barbelo glorious among the realms glory of revelation she gave glory to the virgin spirit she praised him for she arose from him. she is the universal womb she is before everything she is: mother-father first man holy spirit thrice male thrice powerful thrice named androgynous eternal realm first to arise among the invisible realms. she, barbelo, asked the virgin spirit for foreknowledge (prognosis). the spirit agreed. foreknowledge came forth and stood by providence foreknowledge gave glory to the spirit and to barbelo, the spirit’s perfect power, for she was the reason that it had come into being. primary structures of the divine mind she, barbelo, asked the virgin spirit for incorruptibility the spirit agreed. incorruptibility came forth and stood by thought and foreknowledge. incorruptibility gave glory to the invisible virgin spirit and to barbelo, for she was the reason that it had come into being. she asked for everlasting life. the spirit agreed everlasting life came forth and they all stood together. they gave glory to the invisible spirit and to barbelo, for she was the reason that it had come into being. she asked for truth. the spirit agreed truth came forth and they all stood together. they gave glory to the invisible spirit and to barbelo, for she was the reason that it had come into being. this is the fivefold realm of the father: the first man who is the image of the invisible spirit who is providence who is barbelo who is thought. and foreknowledge - incorruptibility - life everlasting - truth secondary structures of the divine mind the father looked into barbelo barbelo conceived and bore a spark of light who had blessedness similar to, but not equal to, her blessedness, who was the only child of that mother–father the only offspring, the only begotten child of the pure light, the father. the invisible virgin spirit celebrated the light that had been produced coming forth from the first power who is the providence barbelo the spirit anointed him with goodness, making him perfect he stood in the spirit’s presence and it was poured upon him. having received this anointing from the spirit he immediately glorified him and he glorified the perfect providence. because of her he had come into being. he asked for mind (nous) to be a companion to him. the spirit consented when the invisible spirit consented mind came into being. it stood by the anointed and glorified the spirit and barbelo he wished to act through the word of the invisible spirit. whose will became an action and appeared with mind glorifying the light. and then word followed will into being. everlasting life and will, mind, and foreknowledge stood together. they glorified the invisible spirit and barbelo. because of her they had come into being. tertiary structures of the divine mind the holy spirit brought his and barbelo’s divine autogenes son to completion in order that he could stand before the great invisible virgin spirit as the divine autogenes christ and honor him with a mighty voice. . the invisible spirit placed the divine autogenes over everything. all authorities were subordinated to him. the truth within him let him learn everything from the incorruptibility, through a gift of the spirit the four lights arising from the divine autogenes stood before him. grace exists within the realm of the light called harmozel, the first angel. along with harmozel are grace truth form the second light is called oriel and it stands over the second realm. with oriel are: conceptualization (epinoia) perception memory the third light is called daveithai and it stands over the third realm. with daveithai are: understanding love idea the fourth light is called eleleth and it stands over the fourth realm. with eleleth are: perfection peace wisdom (sophia). these are the four lights standing before the divine autogenes. twelve realms stand before the son of the powerful the autogenes the christ through the intention and the grace of the invisible spirit twelve realms belong to the son of the autogenes. from the perfect mind’s foreknowledge through the intention of the invisible spirit and the autogenes’s will. the perfect human appeared, its first true manifestation the virgin spirit named the human adamas and placed him over the first realm with the mighty autogenes christ with the first light harmozel and its powers. the invisible one gave adamas invincible power of mind. adamas spoke, glorifying and praising the invisible spirit: “everything has come into being from you everything will return to you. i will praise you and glorify you and the autogenes and the triple realm: father – mother – son, the perfect power.” over the second realm was appointed adamas’s son seth with the second light oriel. in the third realm were placed the children of seth with the third light daveithai. in the fourth realm were placed the souls of those ignorant of the fullness those who did not repent at once but who, after some time, eventually repented, they are with the fourth light eleleth. all of these created beings glorify the invisible spirit a crisis that became the world it happened that the realm (aeon) wisdom (sophia) of conceptual thought (epinoia), began to think for herself, she used the thinking (enthymesis) and the foreknowledge (prognosis) of the invisible spirit. she intended to reveal an image from herself to do so without the consent of the spirit, who did not approve, without the thoughtful assistance of her masculine counterpart, who did not approve. without the invisible spirit’s consent without the knowledge of her partner she brought it into being. because she had unconquerable power her thought was not unproductive. something imperfect came out of her different in appearance from her. because she had created it without her masculine counterpart she gave rise to a misshapen being unlike herself. sophia saw what her desire produced. it changed into the form of a dragon with a lion’s head and eyes flashing lightning bolts. she cast him far from her, outside of the realm of the immortal beings so that they could not see him. sophia surrounded him with a brilliant cloud, put a throne in the center part of the cloud so that no one would see it. she named him yaldabaoth. yaldabaoth is the chief ruler. he took great power (dynamis) from his mother, left her, and moved away from his birthplace. he assumed command, created realms for himself with a brilliant flame that continues to exist even now. the fashioning of this world yadabaoth united with the thoughtlessness (aponoia) within him. he begot ruling authorities (exousia) modeling them on the incorruptible realms above. the first is athoth the second is harmas the third is kalilaumbri the fourth is yabel the fifth is adonaiu the sixth is cain the seventh is abel the eighth is abrisene the ninth is yobel the tenth is armupiel the eleventh is melcheir-adonein the twelfth is belias who rules over the very depth of hades. he made the first seven rulers to reign in the seven spheres of heaven. he made the next five rulers to reign in the five depths of the abyss. he shared a portion of his fire with them, but shared none of the power of light he had received from his mother. this dim ruler has three names: yaldabaoth is the first. saklas is the second. samael is the third. he is blasphemous through his thoughtlessness. he said “i am god, and there is no god but me!” since he didn’t know where his own power originated. his rulers created seven authorities for themselves. each of these authorities created six demons apiece, there came to be 365 demons altogether. here are the seven authorities’ names and physical forms: first, athoth with a sheep’s face second, eloaios with a donkey’s face third, astaphaios with a hyena’s face fourth, yao with the face of a seven headed snake fifth, sabaoth who has the face of a dragon sixth, adonin whose face is that of a monkey seventh, sabbataios with a face of flame and fire. these are the seven of the week. these authorities rule the world. yaldabaoth has many faces. more than all that have been listed so he can convey any face he wants to the seraphim around him. yaldabaoth shared his fire with his seraphim but gave them none of his pure light although he ruled them by virtue of the power and glory of the light had received from his mother. he united his thought’s sevenfold powers with the authorities who accompanied him. he spoke and it happened. he named those sevenfold powers starting with the highest one: goodness paired with the first: athoth providence paired with the second: eloaios divinity paired with the third: astaphaios lordship paired with the fourth: yao kingdom paired with the fifth: sabaoth zeal paired with the sixth: adonin understanding paired with the seventh: sabbataios each has its own realm modeled on one of the higher realms. and each new name refers to a glory in the heavens so that yaldabaoth’s demons might be destroyed. the demons’ own names, given by yaldabaoth, are mighty names but the powers’ names reflecting the glory above will bring about the demons’ destruction and remove their power. that is why each has two names. yaldabaoth modeled his creation on the pattern of the original realms above him so that it might be just like the indestructible realms. when he gazed upon his creation surrounding him he said to his host of demons the ones who had come forth out of him: “i am a jealous god and there is no god but me!” his mother began to move back and forth because she had become aware that she now lacked light for her brightness had dimmed. when she saw the evil that had taken place and the theft of light that her son had committed she repented. in the darkness of ignorance she began to forget. she began to be ashamed. but she could not yet return above yet she began to move. and so she moved back and forth. all of the divine realms (pleroma) heard her repentant prayer they sought blessing for her from the invisible virgin spirit. the spirit consented. he poured the holy spirit over her brought forth from the whole full realm. she was elevated above her son, but she was not restored to her own original realm. she would remain in the ninth sphere until she was fully restored. humanity begins then came a voice from the highest realms saying: “the man exists! and the son of man!” yaldabaoth, chief ruler, heard it he thought it came from his mother he did not know the true source of the voice: the holy mother-father perfect providence image of the invisible father of everything in whom everything has come to be. the first man all of the realm of the chief ruler quaked! the foundations of the abyss moved! he illuminated the waters above the world of matter, his image shown in those waters. all the demons and the first ruler together gazed up toward the underside of the newly shining waters. through that light they saw the image in the waters. yaldabaoth said to his subordinate demons: “let’s create a man according to the image of god and our own likeness so that his image will illuminate us.” each one through another’s power created aspects of the man; each added a characteristic corresponding to the psychic factors they had seen in the image above them. they made a creature of substance in the likeness of that perfect first man and they said, “let us call him adam, so that his name will give us the power of light.” construction of the human body the seven powers began to work: . goodness made a psyche of bone providence made a psyche of sinew divinity made a psyche of flesh lordship made a psyche of marrow kingdom made a psyche of blood zeal made a psyche of skin understanding made a psyche of hair the host of demons took these substances from the powers to create the limbs and the body itself. they put the parts together and coordinated them. the first ones began by making the head: abron created his head; meniggesstroeth created the brain; asterechme the right eye; thaspomocha, the left eye; ieronumos, the right ear; bissoum, the left ear; akioreim, the nose; banenrphroum, the lips; amen, the front teeth; ibikan, the molars; basiliademe, the tonsils; achcha, the uvula; adaban, the neck; chaaman, the neckbones; dearcho, the throat; tebar, the shoulder; mniarcon, the elbow; abitrion, the right arm; evanthen, the left arm; krys, the right hand; beluai, the left hand; treneu, the fingers of the right hand; balbel, the fingers of the left hand; kriman, fingernails; astrops, the right breast; barroph, the left breast; baoum, the right shoulder joint; ararim, the left shoulder joint; areche, the belly; phthave, the navel; senaphim, the abdomen; arachethopi, the right ribs; zabedo, the left ribs; barias, the right hip; phnouth the left hip; abenlenarchei, the marrow; chnoumeninorin, the skeleton; gesole, the stomach; agromauna, the heart; bano, the lungs; sostrapal, the liver; anesimalar, the spleen; thopithro, the intestines; biblo, the kidneys; roeror, the sinews; taphreo, the spine; ipouspoboba, the veins; bineborin, the arteries; atoimenpsephei, respiration; entholleia, the flesh; bedouk, the right buttock; arabeei, the penis; eilo, the testicles; sorma, the genitals; gormakaiochlabar, the right thigh; nebrith, the left thigh; pserem, the kidneys of the right leg; asaklas, the left kidney; ormaoth, the right leg; emenun, the left leg; knyx, the right shin; tupelon, the left shin; achiel, the right knee; phnene, the left knee; phiouthrom, the right foot; boabel, its toes; trachoun, the left foot; phikna, its toes; miamai, the toenails. and those who were appointed over all of these are: zathoth, armas, kalila, iabel, sabaoth, cain, abel. the energizing powers in the limbs were divided among: the head made by diolimodraza; the neck by yammeax; the right shoulder yakouib; the left shoulder verton; the right hand oudidi; the left arbao; the fingers of the right hand lampno; the fingers of the left hand leekaphar; the right breast barbar; the left breast imae; the chest pisandriaptes; the right shoulder joint koade; the left shoulder joint odeor; the right ribs asphixix; the left ribs synogchouta; the abdomen arouph; the womb sabalo; the right thigh charcharb; the left thigh chthaon; the genitals bathinoth; the right leg choux; the left leg charcha; the right shin aroer; the left shin toechtha; the right knee aol; the left knee charaner; the right foot bastan; its toes archentechtha; the left foot marephnounth; its toes abrana. seven govern the whole body: michael, ouriel, asmenedas, saphasatoel, aarmouriam, richram, amiorps. the one who governs perceptions: archendekta the one who governs reception: deitharbathas the one who governs imagination: oummaa the one who governs integration: aachiaram the one who governs impulse: riaramnacho. there is a fourfold source of the bodily demons: hot, cold, dry, wet. ruler of hot: phloxopha ruler of cold: oroorrothos ruler of dry: erimacho ruler of wet: athuro. their mother stands among them: onorthochrasaei she is unlimited she mixes with all of them. she is matter and they are nourished by her. the four chief demons are: ephememphi, associated with pleasure, yoko, associated with desire, nenentophni, associated with distress, blaomen, associated with fear. their mother is esthesis-zouch-epi-ptoe. out from these four demons come passions: from distress arises envy, jealousy, grief, vexation, discord, cruelty, worry, mourning. from pleasure comes much evil and unmerited pride, and so forth. from desire comes anger, fury, bitterness, outrage, dissatisfaction and so forth. from fear emerges horror, flattery, suffering, and shame. this is the total number of the demons: 365 they worked together to complete, part by part, the psychical and the material body. there are even more of them in charge of other passions that i didn’t tell you about. if you want to know about them you will find the information in the book of zoroaster. all of yaldabaoth’s servants and his demons worked to finish the psychic body. for a very long time it lay inanimate it did not move. yaldabaoth’s mother wanted to take back the power she had turned over to the chief ruler. she earnestly asked the most merciful, the mother-father of everything, for help. yaldabaoth deceived by his sacred command he sent down the five lights in the forms of the principal advisors to yaldabaoth. they told yaldabaoth: “blow some of your spirit in the man’s face, then his body will rise up.” yaldabaoth blew some of his spirit into the man. that spirit was the divine power of his mother. his mother’s divine power left yaldabaoth it entered the psychic human body modeled on the primordial image. the human body moved! it grew powerful! it shone! yaldabaoth’s demonic forces envied the man. through their united efforts he had come into being they had given their power to him. his understanding was far greater than that of those who had created him. and greater than that of the chief ruler himself. when they realized that he shone with light and could think better than they could and was naked of evil, they took him and cast him down into the lowest depths of the material world. the beginning of salvation the blessed one. the mother-father the good merciful one looked compassionately upon the mother’s power relinquished by the chief ruler. since yaldabaoth’s demons might again overpower the perceptible psychic body he sent down from his good spirit a helper for adam, out of his great compassion a light-filled epinoia emerged. and he called her life (zoe). she aids the entire creation working with him restoring him to the fullness. she taught adam about the way his people had descended she taught adam about the way he could ascend, which is the way he had descended. the light-filled epinoia was hidden in adam. so that the rulers wouldn’t know about her for epinoia would repair the disaster their mother had caused. the host of rulers and demons plotted together they mixed fire and earth and water together with four blazing winds they melded them together in great turbulence. adam was brought into the shadow of death. they intended to make him anew this time from earth, water, fire, wind, which are matter, darkness, desire, the artificial spirit. this all became a tomb, a new kind of body. those thieves bound the man in it, enchained him in forgetfulness, made him subject to dying. adam in yaldabaoth's paradise the rulers took the man and put him into paradise they told him to eat freely. they placed the tree of their life into the middle of paradise. its root is bitter its branches are dead. its shadow is hatred its leaves are deception the nectar of wickedness is in its blossoms. its fruit is death its seed is desire it flowers in the darkness. those who eat from it are denizens of hades darkness is their resting place. as for the tree called “the knowledge of good and evil” it is the epinoia of the light. they commanded him not to eat from it, standing in front to conceal it, for fear that he might look upwards to the fullness and know the nakedness of his indecency. the chief ruler, yaldabaoth, knew that because the light-filled epinoia within adam made his mental abilities greater than his own, adam had been disobedient. in order to recover the power that he had put into adam yaldabaoth made adam completely forgetful. woman comes into being the light-filled epinoia hid deep within adam. the chief ruler tried to remove her from his ribcage, but epinoia cannot be captured. although the darkness pursued her it did not catch her. the chief ruler did remove a portion of his power from adam to create a person with a woman’s form modeled on the light-filled epinoia that had been manifested to him. he placed the power removed from the man into the woman. adam saw the woman standing next to him. the light-filled epinoia immediately appeared to him she raised up the veil that dulled his mind. he sobered up from the dark drunkenness and he recognized his own counterpart. he said: “this is bone from my bones flesh from my flesh.” because of this a man will leave his mother and father and be joined to a woman and those two will become one flesh. for they will send his helper to him. i appeared as an eagle perched on the tree of knowledge! in order to teach them and raise them up from sleep’s depths. when yaldabaoth discovered that they had moved away from him he cursed his earth. he located the woman as she was preparing herself for her man. he gave the woman over so that the man might be her master, because he did not know the secret of the divine strategy. the man and woman were too terrified to renounce yaldabaoth, who showed his ignorance to his angels and he cast both of them out of paradise dressing them in heavy darkness. the chief archon saw the young woman who was standing by adam. he realized that the light-filled epinoia of life was within her. yaldabaoth became completely ignorant. yaldabaoth raped eve. she bore two sons. yaldabaoth deceptively named the two: cain and abel. yaldabaoth installed the two with authority over natural elements so they can to rule over the tomb. the children of seth populate the world adam had intercourse with the image of his foreknowledge (prognosis) he begot a son like the son of man and he called that son seth modeling him on the heavenly race in the higher realms. in the same way the mother sent down her spirit the image of herself a model of the full higher realm, in order to prepare a place for the descent of the realms. the chief ruler, though, forced the humans to drink from waters of forgetfulness so that they might not know their true place of origin. the children (of seth) remained in this condition for a while in order that when the spirit descends from the holy realms the spirit can raise up the children and heal them from all defects and thus restore complete holiness to the fullness of god. six questions about the soul i asked the savior, “lord, will every soul be saved and enter the pure light?” he replied, “you are asking an important question, one it will be impossible to answer for anyone who is not a member of the unmoved race. they are the people upon whom the spirit of life will descend and the power will enable them to be saved and to become perfect and worthy of greatness. they expunge evil from themselves and they will care nothing for wickedness, wanting only that which is not corrupt. they will achieve freedom from rage, envy, jealousy, desire, or craving.” “the physical body will negatively effect them. they wear it as they look forward to the time when they will meet up with those who will remove it. those people deserve indestructible eternal life. they endure everything, bearing up under everything that happens so that they can deserve the good and inherit life eternal.” then i asked him, “lord, what about the souls who didn’t do these things even though the spirit of life’s power descended on them?“ he answered, “if the spirit descends to people they will be transformed and saved. the power descends on everyone and, without it, no one can even stand up. after they are born, if the spirit of life increases in them, power comes to them and their souls are strengthened. nothing then can leave them astray into wickedness. but if the artificial spirit comes into people, it leads them astray.” then i said, “lord, when souls come out of the flesh where do they go?” he replied, smiling, “if the soul is strong it has more of power than it has of the artificial spirit and so it flees from wickedness. with the assistance of the incorruptible one that soul is saved and it attains eternal rest.” i then asked him, “lord, what of the souls of the people who do not know whose people they are? where do they go?” he responded, “in those people the artificial spirit has grown strong and they have gone astray. their souls are burdened, drawn to wickedness, and cast into forgetfulness.” “when they come forth from the body, such a soul is given over to the powers created by the rulers, bound in chains, and cast into prison again. around and around it goes until it manages to become free from forgetfulness through knowledge. and so, eventually, it becomes perfect and is saved.” then i asked, “lord, how does the soul shrink down so as to be able to enter its mother or a man? he was happy that i asked this and said, “you are truly blessed because you have understood. the soul should be guided by another within whom is the spirit of life. it will be saved by that means and accordingly will not have to enter a body again. and i said, “lord, what happens to the souls of people who achieved true knowledge, but who turned away from it?” he said to me, “demons of poverty will take them to a place where there is no possibility of repentance. there they will stay until the time when those who blasphemed against the spirit will be tortured and subjected to punishment forever.” i asked, “lord, where did the artificial spirit come from?” and he told me: three plots against humanity the mother-father is merciful a holy spirit sympathizing with us. through the epinoia of the providence of the light it raises up the children of the perfect race raising up their thought, their light eternal. when the chief archon learned that they were elevated above him and that their mental ability surpassed his he wanted to put a stop to their thought but he did not know the extent of their mental superiority and he could not stop them. he made a plan with his demons who are his powers each of them fornicated with wisdom (sophia) and produced fate the last variety of imprisonment. fate changes unpredictably it is of different sorts just as the demons are of different sorts. fate is hard. fate is stronger than the gods, the authorities, the demons, the generations of people who are caught up in it. out of fate emerged sinfulness, violence, blasphemy, forgetfulness, ignorance, weighty commandments heavy sins terrible fear. in this way all of creation became blind, ignorant of god above everything. because of imprisonment in forgetfulness they are unaware of their sins, they are bound into periods of time and seasons by fate who is lord of it all. yaldabaoth eventually came to regret everything he had created. he decided to bring a great flood upon creation, upon mankind. but the great light of providence warned noah. he preached to all of the children, the sons of men, but if they were strangers to him they didn’t listen. noah knew his own authority and that of the light being who illuminated them although the chief ruler poured darkness over all the world. the chief ruler and his powers plotted a strategy, to send his demons to human daughters and make themselves children by them to enjoy. but they failed. after their failure they made another plan. they created an artificial spirit modeled on the spirit who descended so, to impregnate souls by means of this spirit, the demons changed appearance to look like the women’s husbands they filled the women with that spirit of darkness and wickedness. they brought into being gold and silver, money and coins, iron and other metals and all things of this sort. and the people who were attracted were led astray into troubles and were greatly misled. and grew old experiencing no pleasure, and died finding no truth, never knowing the true god. this is the way that they enslaved all of creation from the foundation of the world until now. the providence hymn i am the providence of everything. i became like my own human children. i existed from the first. i walked down every possible road. i am the wealth of the light. i am the remembering of the fullness. i walked into the place of greatest darkness and on down. i entered the central part of the prison. the foundations of chaos quaked. i hid because of their evil. they did not recognize me. i came down a second time continuing on. i emerged from among those of light i am the remembering of providence i entered the middle of darkness, the inner part of the underworld to pursue my mission. the foundations of chaos quaked. threatening to collapse upon all who were there and utterly destroy them i soared upward again to my roots in light so as not to destroy them all yet. i descended a third time. i am light i am dwelling in light i am the remembering of providence i entered the midst of darkness i came to the deepest part of the underworld. i let my face light up thinking of the end of their time i entered their prison the body is that prison i cried out: “anyone who hears, rise up from your deep sleep!” and the sleeping one awoke and wept wiping bitter tears saying “who calls me?” “where has my hope come from as i lie in the depths of this prison?” “i am the providence of pure light,” i replied, “i am the thought of the virgin spirit raising you up to an honored place. rise up! remember what you have heard. trace back your roots to me. the merciful one. guard against the poverty demons. guard against the chaos demons. guard against all who would bind you. awaken! stay awake! rise out of the depths of the underworld! i raised him up i sealed him with the light/water of the five seals. death had no power over him ever again. i ascend again to the perfect realm. i completed everything and you have heard it.” conclusion “i have told you everything now so that you can write it all down and share it with your fellow spirits secretly for this is the mystery of the unmoved race.” the savior gave all of this to him to write and to keep carefully. he said to him, “anyone who exchanges it for a present, or for food, or for drink, or for clothing, or for anything else of that sort will be cursed.” these things came to john in a mystery. instantly the savior vanished. john came to his fellow disciples and told them what the savior had said to him. jesus the christ. amen.