Invocation
Let me begin to sing of the Muses of Helikon, who abide on the great and holy
Mount Helikon. Around the deep-blue spring, with dainty feet, they dance, and around
the altar of the mighty son of Kronos. Washing their tender skin in the waters of the
Permessos or of the Horse’s Spring or of holy Olmeios, they set up their choral songsand-dances on the highest point of Helikon. Beautiful and lovely, these [these songsand-dances]. They are nimble with their feet. Starting from there [the top of Helikon],
covered in plenty of mist [invisible], they go about at night, sending forth a very
beautiful voice, singing of Zeus the aegis-bearer and lady Hera of Argos, who walks
about in golden sandals, and the daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, Athena, and
Phoebus Apollo and Artemis who shoots her arrows, and Poseidon, the earthholder and earth-shaker, and the honorable Themis as well as Aphrodite, whose eyes
go from side to side, and Hebe with the golden garland, and beautiful Dione, and Leto,
Iapetos, and Kronos with his devious plans, and the Dawn [Eos] and the great Sun
[Helios] and the bright Moon [Selene], and the Earth [Gaia] and great Okeanos
and dark Night [Nyx], and the sacred genos of all the other immortals, who are
forever.
[It was the Muses] who taught me, Hesiod, their beautiful song. It happened
when I was tending flocks of sheep in a valley of Helikon, that holy mountain. And
the very first thing that the goddesses said to me, those Muses of Mount Olympus,
those daughters of Zeus who holds the aegis, was this wording [mūthos]:
“Shepherds camping in the fields, base objects of reproach, mere bellies! We know
how to say many deceptive things looking like genuine [etuma] things, but we also
know how, whenever we wish it, to proclaim things that are true [alēthea].”That is
how they spoke, those daughters of great Zeus, who have words [epea] that fit
perfectly together, and they gave me a scepter [skēptron], a branch of flourishing
laurel, having plucked it. And it was a wonder to behold. Then they breathed into me
a voice [audē], a godlike one, so that I may make glory [kleos] for things that will
be and things that have been, and then they told me to sing how the blessed ones
[makares = the gods] were generated, the ones that are forever, and that I should
sing them [= the Muses] first and last.
The Muses
But why should I care about those things that keep going around an oak or a
rock? Listen! Let me begin with the Muses, who please Zeus the father with their
song, pleasing his great noos as he abides in Olympus. They tell of things that are,
that will be, and that were before, having their words fitted together as they sound
forth. And their voice pours forth without ever being worn down, coming sweetly
from their mouths. Glad is the palace of father Zeus the loud-thunderer over the
delicate voice of the goddesses which reaches far and wide. It echoes against the
peaks of snowy Olympus and the abodes of the immortals. And they [the Muses] send
forth an immortal voice as they give kleos first to the genos of the gods, a matter of
reverence, starting from the beginning, telling about who were generated from
Earth [Gaia] and the vast Sky [Ouranos], and what gods, givers of good things, were
born from them. Next, they [the Muses] sing of Zeus, father of gods and men, both
when they begin and when they end their song. They sing how much he is the most
important of the gods and the greatest in power. Then again, they sing of the
genos of men and of the strong Giants, thus pleasing the noos of Zeus, who abides in
Olympus.
They are the Olympian Muses, daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus. They were born in
Pieria. The father was Zeus, son of Kronos. Their mother, who mated with him, was
Mnemosyne [Memory], who rules over the heights of Eleuther. They were born to
be the forgetting of misfortunes and the cessation of worries. For nine nights did Zeus
the Planner lie coupled with their mother, entering her holy bed, remote from the
immortals. When a year was up, and the seasons came round as the months were
waning and the many days were coming to fulfillment, she [Mnemosyne] gave
birth to nine daughters, all like-minded, who have song on their minds, in their breast.
They have a thūmos without worries. There they are, poised to descend from the
topmost peak of snowy Olympus. That is where they have their bright dancing-places
and their beautiful abodes. Near them the Kharites [Graces] and Himeros [Desire]
have their abodes, amidst festivities. And they [the Muses], sending forth a lovely
voice, sing and make kleos for the norms [nomoi] and accustomed ways of all the
immortals, as they send forth a lovely voice.
Anyway, back then, they went to Olympus, glorying in their beautiful voice with
immortal song. And the dark earth resounded all around them as they sang, and
the lovely steppings of their feet made a sound from below as they proceeded towards
their father, the one who is king in the sky, with sole possession of the thunder and
the gleaming thunderbolt, having defeated, with his power, Kronos his father. Each
thing was well arranged by him, as he assigned the norms and marked out the
tīmai for the immortals.  These things, then, the Muses sang, they who have
abodes in Olympus, the nine daughters begotten by great Zeus, Kleio [Clio] and
Euterpe and Thaleia [Thalia, ‘Festivity’] and Melpomene and Terpsichore and Erato and
Polyhymnia and Ourania [Urania] and Kalliope [Calliope]. That one [Calliope] is the
most important of them all,  for she accompanies revered kings.  Whosoever
among sky-nourished kings is honored [timân] by these daughters of great Zeus [=
the Muses]  and is beheld by them when he is born,  for such a man they pour
sweet dew upon his tongue,  and from his mouth flow sweet words. The people, 
all of them, look towards him as he sorts out [dia-krinein] the divine laws [themis
plural]  by way of straight judgments [dikai]. And he, speaking without stumbling 
and with his powers of understanding, can even put an end to a great quarrel
[neikos].
 It is for this reason that there are kings, kings with good thinking
[phrenes], namely, because when people  are wronged in the assembly [agorā], they
[= the kings] can turn things right around for them,  quite easily, speaking in a
deflecting way by using soft words.  And when he [= the just king] goes to a
gathering [agōn], the people turn to him as if he were a god,  because of his gentle
command of respect [aidōs], and he stands out among the assembled.  Such is the
sacred gift of the Muses for humankind.  For it is because of the Muses and far-
shooting Apollo  that there are singers [aoidoi] and players of the lyre [kitharis] on
this earth.  And it is because of Zeus that there are kings. Blessed [olbios] is he
whom the Muses  love. And a sweet voice [audē] flows from his mouth. For when
someone has sorrow [penthos] in his thūmos beset by new worries and is distressed
by sorrow in his heart, and when the singer [poet],  therapōn of the Muses, sings
the klea of men who came before and the blessed gods who abide in Olympus, right
away such a man forgets [lēth-] his troubled thoughts, and his cares he no longer
remembers [mnē-]. Quickly the gifts of the goddesses turn him away from these
things.
Be pleased and show your pleasure, children of Zeus, by giving me a lovely song.
 Give kleos to the holy genos of the immortals who have always been, who were
born of Ge [Gaia] and starry Ouranos and of dark Night—the gods who were nurtured
by the salty Pontos. Tell how the gods and the earth were generated at the very
beginning, and the rivers and the boundless pontos, seething with waves,  and the
shining stars and the vast sky above. Tell of the gods, givers of good things, who were
generated from them, and how they divided up their wealth and how each one chose
his or her tīmē.
 And how in the very beginning they came to possess Olympus with
its many ridges. Tell me these things, Olympian Muses, you who abide in Olympus,
 tell it from the beginning, about what was generated first from among them all.
The Cosmogony
First it was Chaos, and next broad-bosomed Earth, ever secure seat of all the
immortals, who inhabit the peaks of snow-capped Olympus, and dark dim Tartaros in
a recess of Earth having-broad-ways,  and Eros [Love], who is most beautiful
among immortal gods, Eros that relaxes the limbs, and in the breasts of all gods and
all men, subdues their reason and prudent counsel. But from Chaos were born Erebos
and black Night; and from Night again sprang forth Aether and Day,  whom she
bore after having conceived, by union with Erebos in love. And Earth bore first like to
herself in size starry Sky, that he might shelter her around on all sides, that so she
might be ever a secure seat for the blessed gods; and she brought forth vast
mountains, lovely haunts of deities,  the Nymphs who dwell along the woodland
hills. She too bore also the barren Sea, rushing with swollen stream, the Pontos, I
mean, without delightsome love; but afterward, having bedded with Sky, she bore
deep-eddying Okeanos, Koios and Kreios, Hyperion and Iapetos,  Thea and Rhea,
Themis, Mnemosyne, and Phoebe with golden coronet, and lovely Tethys. And after
these was born, youngest, wily Kronos, most savage of their children; and he hated
his vigor-giving father.
Then brought she forth next the Kyklopes [Cyclopes], having an over-bearing
spirit:  Brontes, and Steropes, and stout-hearted Arges, who gave to Zeus his
thunder, and forged his lightnings. Now these were in other respects, it is true, like to
gods, but a single eye was fixed in their mid-foreheads. And Kyklopes was their
appropriate name, because  in their foreheads one circular eye was fixed.
Strength, biē, and contrivances were in their works. But again, from Earth and Sky
sprung other three sons, great and mighty, scarce to be mentioned, Kottos and
Briareus and Gyas, children exceeding proud.  From the shoulders of these moved
actively a hundred hands, not brooking approach, and to each above sturdy limbs
there grew fifty heads from their shoulders.
Castration of Ouranos
Now monstrous strength is powerful, joined with vast size. For of as many sons as
were born of Earth and Sky,  they were the fiercest, and were hated by their
father from the very first: as soon as any of these was born, he would hide them all,
and not send them up to the light, in a cave of the earth, and Sky exulted over the
work of mischief, while huge Earth groaned from within,  straitened as she was;
and she devised a subtle and evil scheme. For quickly having produced a stock of
white iron, she forged a large sickle, and gave the word to her children and said
encouragingly, though troubled in her heart: “Children of me and of a father madly
violent, if you  would obey me, we shall avenge the baneful injury of your father;
for he was the first that devised acts of indignity.” So spoke she, but fear seized on
them all, nor did any of them speak; till, having gathered courage, great and wily
Kronos addressed his dear mother thus in reply:  “Mother, this deed at any rate I
will undertake and accomplish, since for our father, of-detested-name, I care not, for
he was the first that devised acts of indignity.” Thus spoke he, and huge Earth
rejoiced much at heart, and hid and planted him in ambush: in his hand she placed
 a sickle with jagged teeth, and suggested to him all the stratagem. Then came
vast Sky bringing Night with him, and, eager for love, brooded around Earth, and lay
stretched on all sides: but his son from out his ambush grasped at him with his left
hand, while in his right he took the huge sickle, long and jagged-toothed, and hastily
 mowed off the genitals of his father, and threw them backwards to be carried
away behind him.
Aphrodite
Not for no purpose did they slip from his hand; for as many gory drops as jetted
forth from there, Earth received them all; and when the years rolled round,  she
gave birth to stern Furies [Erinyes], and mighty Giants, gleaming in arms, with long
spears in hand, and nymphs whom men call Ash-nymphs, [Meliai] over the boundless
earth. But the genitals, as after first severing them with the steel, he had cast them
into the heaving sea from the continent,  so kept drifting long time up and down
the deep, and all around kept rising a white foam from the immortal flesh; and in it a
maiden was nourished; first she drew near divine Kythera, and thence came next to
wave-washed Cyprus. Then forth stepped an awesome, beauteous goddess; and
beneath her delicate feet the grass throve around:  gods and men name her
Aphrodite, the foam-sprung goddess, and fair-wreathed Kytherea—the first because
she was nursed in foam, but Kytherea, because she touched at Kythera; and Cyprusborn, because she was born in wave-dashed Cyprus;  and lover of
smiles, because she emerged out of the genitals. And Eros accompanied her and fair
Desire followed her, when first she was born, and came into the host of the gods. And
from the beginning this honor has she, and this part has she obtained by lot among
men and immortal gods,  the amorous converse of maidens, their smiles and
wiles, their sweet delights, their love, and blandishment.
Night and Her Children
Now those sons, their father, mighty Sky, called by surname Titans, upbraiding
those whom he had himself begotten; and he was accustomed to say that, outstretching their hands in recklessness, they had wrought  a grave act, but that 
there should be vengeance for it hereafter. Night bore also hateful Destiny, and black
Fate, and Death; she bore Sleep likewise, she bore the tribe of dreams; these did the
goddess, gloomy Night bear after union with none. Next again Blame [Mōmos], and
Care full-of-woes,  and the Hesperides, whose care are the fair golden apples
beyond the famous Okeanos, and trees yielding fruit; and she produced the Destinies
[Moirai], and ruthlessly punishing Fates: Klotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, who assign to
men at their births to have good and evil;  who also pursue transgressions both of
men and gods, nor do the goddesses ever cease from dread wrath, before they have
repaid sore vengeance to him, whosoever shall have sinned. Then pernicious Night
also bore Nemesis, a woe to mortal men; and after her she brought forth Fraud, and
Wanton-love,  and mischievous Old Age, and stubborn-hearted Eris. But odious
Eris gave birth to grievous Trouble, and Oblivion, and Famine, and tearful Woes,
Contests and Slaughters, Fights and Homicides, Quarrelings [Neikos pl.], Falsehoods,
Words, Disputes,  Lawlessness and Atē, intimates one of the other, and the Oath,
which most hurts men on the earth, whensoever one has sworn voluntarily a perjured
oath.
Pontos and His Descendants
And Pontos begat trusty and truthful Nereus, eldest indeed of his children, but men
call him old,  because he is unerring as well as mild, neither does he forget the
laws, but knows just and gentle purposes. And next again, by union with Earth, great
Thaumas, and strong Phorkys, and Keto with fair-cheek, and Eurybia, having in her
breast a soul of adamant.  From Nereus and fair-haired Doris, daughter of
Okeanos, perfect stream, sprung lovely daughters of goddesses in the barren sea:
Proto, Eukrante, Sao, and Amphitrite; Eudora, Thetis, Galene, Glauke,  Kymothoe,
Speio, Thoe, and charming Halia; graceful Melite, and Eulimene, and Agaue, Pasithea,
Erato, and rosy-armed Eunike, Doto and Proto, Pherousa, and Dynamene, Nesaia, and
Aktaia, and Protomedeia,  Doris and Panope, and beauteous Galatea, lovely
Hippothoe, and rosy-armed Hipponoe, and Kymothoe, who along with Kymatolege,
and neat-ankled Amphitrite, calms with ease the waves on the misty sea, and the
blasts of violent winds;  Kymo and Eione, and Halimede with beauteous wreath,
and blithe Glaukonome, and Pontoporeia, Leiagora, Euagore, Laomedeia, Polynome,
Autonoe, and Lysianassa, and Euarne, both lovely in shape and in beauty faultless,
 and Psamathe, graceful in person, and divine Menippe, Neso, Eupompe,
Themisto, Pronoe, and Nemertes, who has the mind of her immortal father. These
were born of blameless Nereus, fifty maidens, versed in blameless labors.
 And Thaumas wedded Electra, daughter of deep-flowing Okeanos: she bore
rapid Iris, and the fair-tressed Harpies, Aello and Okypete, who accompany the windblasts and birds, with swift wings, for they fly high above the earth.  But to
Phorkys next Keto of-fair-cheek bore the Graiai, gray from their birth, whom in fact
immortal gods as well as men walking on the ground call Graiai; namely, Pemphredo
handsomely-clad, and Enyo of saffron-vestment, and the Gorgons, who dwell beyond
famous Okeanos,  in the most remote quarter night-ward, where are the clearvoiced Hesperides, Stheno, Euryale, and Medusa having-suffered sadly. The latter was
mortal, but they, the other two, were immortal and ageless, and it was with that one
[Medusa] that the azure-haired god lay in the soft meadow, and amid the flowers of
spring.  From her too when, as the tale is, Perseus had cut off the head, up
sprang huge Khrysaor and the steed Pegasus. To the latter came his name because he
was born near the springs of Okeanos, while the other had a golden sword in his
hands. And he indeed, winging his flight away, left Earth, the mother of flocks, 
and came to the immortals; in Zeus’s house he dwells, bearing to counselor Zeus
thunder and lightning. But Khrysaor, by union with Kallirhoe, daughter of famous
Okeanos, begat three-headed Geryon. Indeed then mighty Hēraklēs slew him, 
amidst his trailing-footed oxen in sea-girt Erythia, on the very day when he drove the
broad-browed oxen to sacred Tiryns, having crossed the path of Okeanos, and having
slain beyond famous Okeanos Orthos, and the herdsman Eurytion in a dusky stall.
 And she brought forth another monster, irresistible, in no way like mortal
men, or immortal gods, in a hollow cavern; the divine stubborn-hearted Echidna, half
nymph, with dark eyes and fair cheeks; and half, on the other hand, a serpent huge,
and terrible, and vast,  speckled, and flesh-devouring, beneath caves of sacred
Earth. For there is her cavern, deep under a hollow rock, far from immortal gods as
well as mortal men: there have the gods assigned to her famous abodes to inhabit.
But she, the destructive Echidna, was confined in Arima beneath the earth,  a
nymph immortal, and all her days insensible to age. With her they say that Typhaon
associated in love, a terrible and lawless ravisher for the dark-eyed maid. And she,
having conceived, bore fierce-hearted children. The dog Orthos first she bore for
Geryon, and next,  in the second place, she brought forth their irresistible and
ineffable flesh-devourer Cerberus, dog of hell, with brazen voice and with fifty heads,
a bold and strong beast. Thirdly, again she gave birth to the Lernaean Hydra subtle in
destruction, whom Hera, white-armed goddess, reared,  implacably hating the
mighty Hēraklēs. And Zeus’s son, Hēraklēs, named of Amphitryon—along with warlike
Iolaos, and by the counsels of Pallas the despoiler—slaughtered it with ruthless sword.
But she [Echidna] bore Chimaera, breathing resistless fire,  fierce and huge,
fleet-footed as well as strong; this monster had three heads: one indeed of a grimvisaged lion, one of a goat, and another of a serpent, a fierce dragon; in front a lion, a
dragon behind, and in the midst a goat; breathing forth the dread strength of burning
fire.  Pegasus, with brave Bellerophon, slew her. But she, compelled by Orthos,
brought forth in sooth the destructive Sphinx, a destruction to the Kadmeians; and the
Nemean lion, whom Hera, Zeus’s glorious consort, reared, and settled in the cornlands of Nemea, a woe to mankind.  There abiding truly used he to devour the
tribes of men, while he held sway over Tretos of Nemea, and over Apesas: but the
might of strong Hēraklēs subdued him. And Keto mingling in love with Phorkys,
brought forth, as youngest-born, a terrible serpent,  which in hiding-places of dark
earth, guards all-golden apples, in wide bounds. Such then is the brood of Keto and
Phorkys.
Descendants of Ouranos: Children of Tethys and Okeanos
But Tethys to Okeanos bore eddying rivers, Nile and Alpheus, and deep-eddying
Eridanos; Strymon, and Maeander and Istros of-fair-stream,  Phasis, Rhesus, and
Akhelōios with silvery-tide, Nessos, and Rhodios, Haliakmon and Heptaporos,
Granikos, Aisepos, and divine Simoeis, Peneios, Hermos, and pleasant-flowing Kaikos;
and vast Sangarios, Ladon, Parthenios,  Euenus, and Ardeskos and divine
Skamandros. And she bore a sacred race of daughters, who with King Apollo and the
rivers all earth over bring up men to manhood, and have this prerogative from Zeus,
namely, Peitho, Admete, Ianthe, Electra,  Doris and Prymno, and goddess-like 
Urania, Hippo, and Klymene, Rhodia, and Kallirhoe, Zeuxo and Klytia, Iduia and
Pasithoe, Plexaure, Galaxaure, lovely Dione, Melobosis, and Thoe, and fair Polydora,
and  Kerkeis in nature amiable, and bright-eyed Plouto, Perseis, Ianeira, Akaste,
and Xanthe, and winsome Petraia, Menesto, and Europa, Mētis, Eurynome, and
saffron-robed Telesto, Krenaeis, Asia as well as desire-kindling Kalypsō,  Eudora,
Tyche, Amphiro, and Okyrhoë, and Styx, who truly is eldest of them all. Now these
were born eldest daughters of Okeanos and Tethys; there are, however, many others
also: for thrice a thousand are the tapering-ankled Okeanos-nymphs,  who truly
spreading far and near, bright children of the gods, haunt everywhere alike earth and
the depths of the lake. And again, as many other rivers flowing with a ringing noise,
sons of Okeanos, whom august Tethys bore. It would be hard for mortal man to tell
the names of all of them,  but they who dwell around them know the names of
each..
Descendants of Ouranos: Children of Theia and Hyperion
And Theia, overcome in the embrace of Hyperion, brought forth the great Sun, and
bright Moon, and Dawn, that shines for all that-dwell-on-the-earth, and for immortal
gods, who occupy the broad sky.
Descendants of Ouranos: Children of Kreios and Eurybia
 Eurybia too, a goddess among goddesses, bore to Kreios, after union in love,
huge Astraios, and Pallas, and Perses, who was transcendent in all knowledge. And to
Astraios Dawn brought forth the strong-spirited winds, Argestes, Zephyr, swiftspeeding Boreas,  and Notos, when she, a goddess, had mingled in love with a
god. And after them the goddess of morning produced the star Morning Star, and the
brilliant stars with which the sky is crowned. And Styx, daughter of Okeanos, after
union with Pallas, bore within the house Zēlos and beauteous-ankled Victory;  and
she gave birth to Strength [Kratos] and Force [Biē], illustrious children, whose abode
is not apart from Zeus, nor is there any seat, or any way, where the god does not go
before them; but always they sit beside deep-thundering Zeus. For thus counseled
Styx, imperishable Okeanos-nymph,  at the time when the Olympian Lightener
summoned all the immortal gods to broad Olympus, and said that whoso of the gods
would fight with him against the Titans, none of them would he rob of his rewards, but
each should have the honor that he had earlier among the immortal gods.  And he
said that anyone who was unhonored or ungifted by Kronos, he would establish in
honor, and rewards, according to justice. Then first came imperishable Styx to
Olympus along with her children through the counsels of her father. And Zeus honored
her, and gave her exceeding gifts.  For he ordained her to be the great Oathwitness of the gods, and her children to be dwellers-with-her all their days. And even
as he promises, he performed to them all for ever: for he has power and reigns
mightily.
Descendants of Ouranos: Children of Phoebe and Koios
And next Phoebe came to the much-beloved couch of Koios:  then in truth
having conceived, a goddess by love of a god, she bore dark-robed Leto, ever mild,
gentle to mortals and immortal gods, mild from the beginning, most kindly within
Olympus. And she bore renowned Asteria, whom once Perses  led to an ample 
palace to be called his bride.
Hekatē
And she, becoming pregnant, brought forth Hekatē, whom Zeus, the son of
Kronos, honored beyond all and provided for her splendid gifts, to wit, to hold a share
of earth and of barren sea. But she has obtained honor also from starry Sky,  and
has been honored chiefly by immortal gods. For even now when anywhere some one
of men upon-the-earth duly propitiates them by doing worthy sacrifice, he calls on
Hekatē; and abundant honor very speedily attends him, whose vows the goddess shall
receive, that is to say, graciously,  and to him she presents wealth, for she has
the power. For as many as were born of Earth and Sky, and received a share of honor,
of all these she has the lot, neither did the son of Kronos force any portion from her,
nor did he take away as many honors as she has obtained by lot among the elder
gods, the Titans,  but she has them, as at the first the distribution was from the
beginning. Nor, because she is sole-begotten, has the goddess obtained less of honor,
and her prerogative on earth, and in the sky, and sea, but even still much more,
seeing that Zeus honors her. And to whom she wills, she is greatly present, and
benefits him,  and he is distinguished, whom she wants that way, in the assembly
among the people; and when men arm for mortal-destroying war, then the goddess
draws nigh to whom she will, kindly to proffer victory and to extend renown to them:
and in judgment she sits beside august kings:  and propitiously again, when men
contend in the games, there the goddess stands near these also, and helps them. And
when he has conquered by strength and might, a man carries with ease a noble prize,
and rejoicingly presents glory to his parents. Propitious is she also to be present with
horsemen, whenever she wishes;  and to them who ply the rough silvery main;
and they pray to Hekatē and the loud-sounding Earth-shaker. Easily too the glorious
goddess presents an ample spoil, and easily is she accustomed to withdraw it when it
is shown, that is, if she is so disposed in her mind. And propitious along with Hermes
to increase the flock in the folds,  the herds of cattle, and the droves, and broad
herds of goats, and flocks of fleecy sheep, if she chooses in her heart, she makes
great from small, and is accustomed to make less from being many. Thus, in truth,
though being sole-begotten from her mother, she has been honored with rewards
amidst all the immortals.  And the son of Kronos made her the nursing-mother-ofchildren, who after her have beheld with their eyes the light of far-seeing Dawn. Thus
is she from the beginning nursing-mother, and such are her honors.
Descendants of Ouranos: Children of Rhea and Kronos
Rhea too, embraced by Kronos, bore renowned children, Hestia, Demeter, and
Hera of-the-golden-sandals,  and mighty Hādēs, who inhabits halls beneath the
earth, having a ruthless heart; and loud-resounding Poseidon, and counseling Zeus,
father of gods as well as men, by whose thunder also the broad earth quakes. And
them indeed did huge Kronos devour,  namely, every one who came to the
mother’s knees from her holy womb, with this intent, that none other of the illustrious
sky-born might hold royal honor among the immortals. For he had heard from Earth
and starry Sky that it was fated for him, strong though he was, to be subdued by his
own child,  through the counsels of mighty Zeus: wherefore he did not keep a
careless watch, but lying in wait for them, kept devouring his own sons; while a grief
not-to-be-forgotten possessed Rhea. But when at length she was about to bear Zeus, 
the father of gods as well as men, then it was that she essayed to supplicate her
parents dear,  Earth and starry Sky, to contrive a plan how she might without
observation bring forth her son, and avenge the furies of their father, against his
children, whom great and wily Kronos devoured. And they duly heard and complied
with their dear daughter,  and explained to her as much as it had been fated
should come to pass concerning king Kronos, and his strong-hearted son. And they
sent her to Lyktos, to the fertile tract of Crete, when she was about to bear the
youngest of her sons, mighty Zeus: whom indeed vast earth received from her  to
rear and nurture in broad Crete. Thereupon indeed came she, bearing him through the
swift dark night, to Lyktos first, and took him in her hands and hid him in a deep cave,
beneath the recesses of the divine earth, in the dense and wooded Aegean Mount.
 But to the great prince, the son of Sky, former sovereign of the gods, she
gave a huge stone, having wrapped it in swaddling clothes: which he then took in his
hands, and stowed away into his belly, wretch as he was, nor did he consider in his
mind that against him for the future his own invincible and untroubled son was left
instead of a stone,  who was shortly about to subdue him by strength of hand,
and to drive him from his honors, and himself to reign among the immortals. Quickly
then throve the spirit and beauteous limbs of the king, and, as years came round,
having been beguiled by the wise counsels of Earth  huge Kronos, wily counselor,
let loose again his offspring, having been conquered by the arts and strength of his
son. And first he disgorged the stone, since he swallowed it last. This stone Zeus fixed
down upon the earth with-its-broad-ways, in divine Pytho [Delphi], beneath the clefts
of Parnassus,  to be a sēma thereafter, a marvel to mortal men. Then he loosed
from destructive bonds his father’s brethren, the sons of Sky, whom his father had
bound in his folly. And they showed gratitude to him for his kindnesses, and gave him
the thunder, and the smoking bolt,  and lightning; but earlier huge Earth had
hidden them; trusting on these, he rules over mortals and immortals.
Descendants of Ouranos: Children of Iapetos and Klymene
Iapetos, moreover, wedded the damsel Klymene, a fair-ankled Okeanos-daughter,
and ascended into a common bed. And she bore him Atlas, a stout-hearted son, 
and brought forth exceeding-famous Menoitios, and artful Prometheus, full of various
wiles, and Epimetheus of-erring-mind, who was from the first an evil to gain-seeking
men: for he first received from Zeus the clay-formed woman, a virgin. But the insolent
Menoitios wide-seeing Zeus  thrust down to Erebos, having, stricken him with
flaming lightning, on account of his arrogance, and overweening strength. But Atlas
upholds broad Sky by strong necessity, before the clear-voiced Hesperides, standing
on earth’s verge, with head and unwearied hands.  For this lot counseling Zeus
apportioned to him.
Prometheus
And wily-minded Prometheus he bound in indissoluble bonds, with painful chains,
having thrust them through the middle of a column. And he urged against him an
eagle with-wings-outspread: but it kept feeding on his immortal liver, while it would
increase to a like size  all-round by night, to what the eagle with-wings-outspread
had eaten during the whole day before. Indeed Hēraklēs, valiant son of fair-ankled
Alkmene, slew this bird, and repelled from the son of Iapetos the baneful pest, and 
released him from his anxieties, not against the wiles of high-reigning Olympian Zeus,
 so that the kleos of Thebes-born Hēraklēs might be yet more than before over
the many-feeding earth. Thus he honors his very famous son, through veneration for
him. And, though incensed, he [Zeus] ceased from the wrath which he was harboring
because he [Hēraklēs] strove in plans against the almighty son of Kronos.
Prometheus: Zeus’s Choice of the Sacrifice
 When the gods and mortal men were contending at Mekone, then did he
[Prometheus] set before him [Zeus] a huge ox, having divided it with ready mind,
studying to deceive the wisdom of Zeus. For here, on the one hand, he deposited the
flesh and entrails with rich fat on the hide, having covered it with the belly of the ox;
and there, on the other hand, he laid down,  having well disposed them with
subtle craft, the white bones of the ox, covering them with white fat. Then it was that
the father of gods and men addressed him, “Son of Iapetos, far-famed among all
kings, how unfairly, good friend, you have divided the portions.”  Thus spoke
rebukingly Zeus, skilled in imperishable counsels. And him in his turn wily Prometheus
addressed, laughing low, but he was not forgetful of subtle craft: “Most glorious Zeus,
greatest of ever-living gods, choose which of these your inclination within your breast
bids you.” He spoke in subtlety:  but Zeus knowing imperishable counsels was
aware, in fact, and not ignorant of his guile; and was boding in his heart evils to
mortal men, which also were about to find accomplishment. Then with both hands he
lifted up the white fat. But he was incensed in mind, and wrath came around him in
spirit,  when he saw the white bones of the ox arranged with guileful art. And
thenceforth the tribes of men on the earth burn to the immortals white bones on
fragrant altars. Then cloud-compelling Zeus addressed him, greatly displeased: “Son
of Iapetos, skilled in wise plans beyond all,  you do not, good sir, yet forget subtle
craft.” Thus spoke in his wrath Zeus knowing imperishable counsels: from that time
forward, ever mindful of the fraud, he did not give the strength of untiring fire to
wretched mortal men, who dwell upon the earth.  But the good son of Iapetos
cheated him, and stole the far-seen splendor of untiring fire in a hollow fennel-stalk;
but it stung High-thundering Zeus to his heart’s core, and incensed his spirit, when he
saw the radiance of fire conspicuous among men.
Prometheus: Pandora and the Lineage of Women
 Forthwith then he fashioned evil for men in requital for the fire bestowed. For
from the earth the famous Hephaistos, halting in both feet, fashioned the image of a
modest maiden, through the counsels of the son of Kronos. And the goddess glancingeyed Athena girded and arrayed her in silver-white raiment;  and from her head
she held with her hands a curiously embellished veil, a marvel to look upon: and
Pallas Athena placed around her about her head lovely garlands fresh-budding with
meadow-flowers, and around her head she set a golden coronet, which renowned
Hephaistos lame with both feet had made himself,  having wrought it carefully by
hand, out of compliment to Zeus his father. On it had been wrought many curious
monsters, a marvel to view, as many as in great abundance the continent and the sea
maintain. Many of these he introduced, and much elegance beamed from it, of
wondrous beauty, like to living animals gifted with sounds.  But when he had
wrought a beauteous evil instead of good, he led her forth even where were the rest
of gods and men, exulting as she was in the adornment of the gleaming-eyed 
daughter-of-a-strong-father: and wonder seized immortal gods as well as mortal men,
when they beheld a deep snare, against which man’s craftiness is in vain.
 From her is the race of tender women. For from her is a pernicious race.
Tribes of women, a great source of hurt, dwell with mortal men, helpmates not in
consuming poverty, but in surfeit. And as when in close-roofed hives bees  feed
drones, sharers in bad works, the former through the whole day till sunset are busy
day by day, and make white combs, while the latter, remaining within in the closeroofed hives, reap the labors of others for their own stomachs.  Just as to mortal
men high-thundering Zeus gave women as an evil, accomplices of painful toils:
another evil too did he provide instead of good; to wit whosoever shunning marriage
and the ills that women work, declines to marry, and has come to old age pernicious,
 through want of one to tend his final days; he lives not, it is true, in lack of
subsistence, but, when he is dead, distant kindred divide his possessions; while to
whomsoever, on the other hand, the lot of marriage shall have fallen, and he has had
a good wife congenial to his heart, to him then forever ill contends with good to be
with him:  but whoso finds a baneful breed, lives with an incessant care to spirit
and heart within his breast, and it is an irremediable woe. Thus it is not possible to
deceive or overreach the mind of Zeus, for neither did Prometheus, helpful son of
Iapetos,  escape from beneath his severe wrath; but a great chain, by necessity,
constrains him, very knowing though he is.
Titanomachy
But when first their father became angry in spirit against Briareus, Kottos, and
Gyes, he bound them with a strong bond, admiring their overweening courage, and
also their form  and bulk; and he made them dwell beneath the roomy earth.
Then they in grief dwelling beneath the earth, sat at the verge, on the extremities of
vast Earth, very long, afflicted, having a great woe at heart; but them the son of
Kronos, and other immortal gods,  whom fair-haired Rhea bore in the embrace of
Kronos, by the counsels of Earth brought up again to light: for she recounted to them
at large everything, how they should along with those [Briareus, Kottos, and Gyes]
gain victory and splendid glory. Long time then they fought, incurring soul-vexing toil,
 the Titan gods and as many as were born from Kronos, in opposition to each
other in stout conflicts; the one side, the glorious Titans from lofty Othrys, and the
other, the gods, givers of good things, whom Rhea the fair-haired had borne to
Kronos, in union with him, from Olympus.
 They then in soul-distressing battle, one party with the other, were fighting
continuously more than ten years. Nor was there any riddance or end of severe
contention to either party, and the completion of the war was extended equally to
either. But when at length Zeus set before them all things agreeable,  to wit,
nectar and ambrosia, on which the gods themselves feed, a noble spirit grew in the
breasts of all. And when they had tasted the nectar and delightful ambrosia, then at
length the father of gods and men addressed them: “Hear me, illustrious children of
Earth and Sky,  that I may speak what my spirit within my breast prompts me to
speak. For now a very long space we are fighting, each in opposition to other,
concerning victory and power, all our days, the Titan gods and as many of us are
sprung from Kronos.  Now you must show against the Titans in deadly fight both
mighty force and hands invincible, in gratitude for our mild loving-kindness, namely, 
after how many sufferings you came back again to the light, from afflictive bondage,
through our counsels, from the murky gloom.” Thus he spoke; and him in turn
blameless Kottos addressed in answer:  “Excellent Lord, you do not tell things
unlearned by us; but we too are aware that your wisdom is excellent, and excellent
your intellect, and that you have been to the immortals an averter of terrible
destruction. And back again, from harsh bonds, have we come from the murky
darkness, through your thoughtful care,  O royal son of Kronos, having
experienced treatment unhoped-for. Wherefore also now with steadfast purpose and
prudent counsel we will protect your might in dread conflict, fighting with the Titans in
stout battles.”
Thus he spoke; and the gods, givers of good, approved,  when they had heard
his speech: and their spirit was eager for battle still more than before, and they stirred
up unhappy strife all of them, female as well as male, on that day, both Titan gods,
and as many as had sprung from Kronos, and they whom Zeus sent up to light from
Erebos, beneath the earth,  terrible and strong, having overweening biē. From the
shoulders of these a hundred hands outsprung to all alike, and to each fifty heads
grew from their shoulders over their sturdy limbs. They then were pitted against the
Titans in deadly combat,  holding huge rocks in their sturdy hands. But the Titans
on the other side made strong their phalanxes with alacrity, and both sides were
showing work of hand and biē at the same time, and the boundless sea re-echoed
terribly, and earth resounded loudly, and the broad sky groaned,  being shaken,
and vast Olympus was convulsed from its base under the violence of the immortals,
and a severe quaking came to murky Tartaros, namely, a hollow sound of countless
chase of feet, and of strong battle-strokes: to such an extent did they hurl groancausing weapons.  And the voice of both sides reached the starry sky as they
cheered, for they came together with a great war-cry.
No longer did Zeus restrain his fury, but then forthwith his heart was filled with
fierceness, and he began also to exhibit all his biē: then, from the sky and from
Olympus  he went forth lightening continually, and the bolts close together with
thunder and lightning flew duly from his sturdy hand, whirling a sacred flash, in
frequent succession, while all-around life-giving Earth was crashing in conflagration,
and the immense forests on all sides crackled loudly with fire.  All land was
boiling, and the streams of Okeanos, and the barren sea. Hot vapor was circling the
earth-born Titans, and the incessant blaze reached the divine dense-atmosphere,
while flashing radiance of thunderbolt and lightning was bereaving their eyes of sight,
strong though they were.  Fearful heat likewise possessed Chaos; and it seemed,
to look at, face to face, with the eye, and to hear the sound with the ear, just as if
earth and the broad sky from above were threatening to meet: for such an exceeding
crash would have arisen from earth falling in ruins, and the sky dashing it down from
above.  Such a din there rose when the gods clashed in strife. The winds too at
the same time were stirring up quaking and dust together, thunder and lightning and
smoking bolt, shafts of the mighty Zeus; and they were bearing shout and battle-cry
into the midst, one of another; then a terrible noise  of dreadful strife was roused,
strength of prowess was put forth, and the battle was inclined; but before that time
assailing one another, they were fighting incessantly in stern conflict. Now the others
among the first ranks roused the keen fight, Kottos, Briareus, and Gyes insatiable in
war,  who truly were hurling from sturdy hands three hundred rocks close upon
each other, and they had overshadowed the Titans with missiles, sent them beneath 
the broad-wayed earth, and bound them in painful bonds, having conquered them
with their hands, over-haughty though they were,  as far beneath under earth as
the sky is from the earth, for equal is the space from earth to murky Tartaros.
Depiction of the Underworld
For nine nights and days also would a brazen anvil be descending from the sky,
and come on the tenth to the earth; and nine days as well as nights again would a
brazen anvil be descending  from the earth, to reach on the tenth to Tartaros.
Around it moreover a brazen fence has been forged, and about it Night is poured in
three rows around the neck; but above spring the roots of Earth and barren Sea.
There, under murky darkness, the Titan gods  lie hidden by the counsels of cloudcompelling Zeus in a dark, dreary place, where are the extremities of vast Earth.
These may not go forth, for Poseidon has placed above them brazen gates, and a wall
goes round them on both sides. There dwell Gyes, and Kottos, and high-spirited
Briareus,  faithful guards of aegis-bearing Zeus. And there are the sources and
boundaries of dusky Earth, of murky Tartaros, of barren Sea, and starry Sky, all in
their order: boundaries oppressive and gloomy, which also even gods abhor,  a
vast chasm, not even for a whole round of a year would one reach the ground, after
having first been within the gates: but gusts of wind following one upon the other
would bear him onward hither and thither, distressing him, and dreadful even to
immortal gods is this prodigy.
There the dread abodes of gloomy Night  stand shrouded in dark clouds. In
front of these the son of Iapetos stands and holds broad Sky, with his head and
unwearied hands, unmovedly, where Night and Day also drawing near are accustomed
to salute each other, as they cross the vast  brazen threshold. The one is about to
go down within, while the other comes forth abroad, nor ever does the abode
constrain both within; but constantly one at any rate being outside the dwelling,
wanders over the earth, while the other again being within the abode, awaits the
season of her journey, until it comes;  the one having a far-seeing light for menon-the-earth, and the other, destructive Night, having Sleep, the brother of Death, in
its hands, being shrouded in hazy mist. And there the sons of obscure Night hold their
habitation, Sleep and Death, dread gods: nor ever does  the bright sun look upon
them with his rays, as he ascends the sky, or descends from the sky. Of whom indeed
the one tarries on the earth and the broad surface of the sea, silently and soothingly
to men; but of the other, iron is the heart, and brazen is his  ruthless soul within
his breast; and whomsoever of men he may have first caught, he holds: and he is
hostile even to immortal gods. There in the front stand the resounding abodes of the
infernal god, of mighty Hādēs, and awesome Persephone besides; and a fierce dog
keeps guard in front, a ruthless dog;  and he has an evil trick: those who enter he
fawns upon with his tail and both ears alike, yet he allows them not to go forth back
again, but lies in wait and devours whomsoever he may have caught going forth
outside the gates of strong Hādēs and dread Persephone.
 There too dwells a goddess odious to immortals, dread Styx, eldest daughter
of back-flowing Okeanos: and apart from the gods she inhabits renowned dwellings
vaulted by huge rocks; and round about on all sides they are strengthened to Sky by
silver columns.  And seldom goes the fleet-footed daughter of Thaumas, Iris, on a
message over the broad back of the sea, namely, when by chance strife and quarrel 
shall have arisen among the immortals: and whosoever of them that hold Olympian
dwellings, utters falsehood, then also Zeus is accustomed to send Iris to bring 
from far in a golden ewer the great oath of the gods, the renowned water, cold as it is,
which also runs down from a steep and lofty rock; but in abundance beneath the
roomy Earth flows a branch of Okeanos from the sacred river through black Night; and
a tenth portion has been assigned to it.  In nine portions indeed, rolling around
Earth and also the broad back of the Sea with silver whirlpools, he [Okeanos] falls into
the brine; but the other part flows forth from a rock, a great bane to the gods.
Whosoever of immortals that occupy the top of snowy Olympus, shall have offered of
this as a libation, and sworn over it a false oath,  lies breathless until the
completion of a year, nor ever comes near the repast of nectar and ambrosia, but also
lies breathless and speechless on a strewn couch, and a baneful stupor over-shrouds
him. But when he has fulfilled his malady until the full year,  then another after
another more severe trouble succeeds for him. And for nine years he is parted from
the ever-living gods; nor ever does he mix with them in council nor in feasts for nine
whole years; but in the tenth he mingles again in the assemblies of the gods
immortal, who occupy Olympian dwellings.  Such a grave oath have the gods
made the imperishable water of Styx, that ancient water, which also runs through a
very rugged tract.
There too are the sources and boundaries of dusky Earth, and murky Tartaros, and
barren Sea, and starry Sky, all in order;  boundaries oppressive and gloomy,
which also even gods abhor. And there are gleaming gates and a brazen threshold,
unshaken and fixed upon far-extending foundations, self-growing; and before it,
outside of all the gods, beyond gloomy Chaos, the Titans dwell.  But the famed
allies of loud-crashing Zeus inhabit dwellings under the foundations of the Okeanos,
namely, Kottos and Gyes. Briareus indeed, for his part, strong as he was, deepsounding Earth-shaker made his son-in-law, and gave him to wife his daughter
Kymopolia.
Typhonomachy
 But when Zeus had driven the Titans out from Sky, huge Earth bore her
youngest-born son, Typhoeus, by the embrace of Tartaros, through golden Aphrodite.
Whose hands, indeed, are apt for deeds on the score of strength, and untiring the feet
of the strong god; and from his shoulders  there were a hundred heads of a
serpent, a fierce dragon, playing with dusky tongues, and from the eyes in his
wondrous heads fire was gleaming, as he looked keenly. In all his terrible heads, too,
were voices  sending forth every kind of sound ineffable. For a while they would
utter sounds, so as for the gods to understand, and at another time again the voice of
a loud-bellowing bull, untamable in force, and proud in utterance; at another time,
again, that of a lion possessing a daring spirit; at another yet again they would sound
like to whelps, wondrous to hear;  and at another he would hiss, and the lofty
mountains resound.
And, in fact, it was then that there would have been done a deed past remedy, and
he, yes, he, would have reigned over mortals and immortals, unless the father of gods
and men had quickly observed him. Harshly then he thundered, and heavily,  and
terribly the earth re-echoed around; and the broad sky above, and the sea, and
streams of Okeanos, and the abysses of earth. But beneath his immortal feet vast 
Olympus trembled, as the king rose up, and earth groaned beneath. And the heat
from both caught the dark-colored sea,  both of the thunder and lightning, and
fire from the monster, the heat arising from the thunder-storms, winds, and burning
lightning. And all earth and sky and sea were boiling; and huge billows roared around
the shores about and around, beneath the violence of gods; and unallayed quaking
arose.  Hādēs trembled, monarch over the dead beneath; and the Titans under
Tartaros, standing about Kronos, trembled also, on account of the unceasing tumult
and dreadful contention. But then Zeus had raised high his wrath, and had taken his
arms, his thunder and lightning, and smoking bolt, leapt up,  and smote him from
Olympus, and scorched all-around all the wondrous heads of the terrible monster. But
when at length he had quelled it, after having smitten it with blows, the monster fell
down lamed, and huge Earth groaned. But the flame from the lightning-blasted
monster flashed forth  in the mountain-hollows, hidden and rugged, when he was
stricken, and much was the vast earth burnt and melted by the boundless vapor, like
pewter, heated by the craft of youths, and by the well-bored melting-pit; or iron,
which is the hardest of metals,  subdued in the dells of the mountain by blazing
fire, melts in the sacred earth beneath the hands of Hephaistos. So was earth melted
in the glare of burning fire. Then, troubled in spirit, he hurled him into wide Tartaros.
Now from Typhoeus is the strength of winds moist-blowing,  except the
southwest, the north, and Argestes, and Zephyr, who also indeed are a race from the
gods, a great blessing to mortals. But the others, being random gusts, breathe over
the sea. And these falling upon the darksome deep rage with baneful gusts, a great
hurt to mortals;  and now here, now there they blow, and scatter ships, and
destroy sailors: nor is there any relief from ill to men, who encounter them on the sea.
But these again over the boundless flowery earth spoil the pleasant works of earthborn men,  filling them with dust and wearisome uproar.
Descendants of Kronos: Children of Zeus
But when the blessed [makar] gods had fulfilled their labor [ponos], and contended
with the Titans perforce on the score of honors [tīmai], then it was, I say, that they
urged far-seeing Zeus, by the advice of Earth, to rule and reign  over immortals:
and he duly distributed honors [tīmai] amongst them. And Zeus, king of the gods,
made Mētis first his wife; Mētis, most wise of deities as well as mortal men. But when
at last she was about to give birth to Athena, gleaming-eyed goddess, then it was that
having by deceit beguiled her mind  with flattering words, he placed her [Mētis]
within his own belly by the advice of earth, and of starry Sky. For thus they persuaded
him, lest other of ever-living gods should possess sovereign honor in the room of
Zeus. For of her [Mētis] it was fated that wise children should be born:  first the
glancing-eyed Tritonian maiden, having equal might and prudent counsel with her
father; and then she [Mētis] was going to give birth to a son, as king of gods and
men, with an overbearing spirit, if it had not been for the fact that Zeus deposited her
first in his own belly,  that the goddess might indicate to him both good and bad.
Next he wedded bright Themis, who bore the Hōrai: Eunomia, Dikē, and blooming
Peace, who care for their works for mortal men; and the Fates [moirai], to whom
counseling Zeus gives most honor,  Klotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, who also give
to men good and evil to possess. And Eurynome, daughter of Okeanos, having a very
lovely form, bore him the fair-cheeked Kharites [Graces]: Aglaia, and Euphrosyne, and
winsome Thalia;  from whose eyelids also as they gazed dropped Love, unnerving
limbs, and sweetly too they look from under their brows. But he came to the couch of
much-nourishing Demeter, who bore him white-armed Persephone; her whom Hādēs
ravished from her mother: and sage Zeus gave her away. And next he was enamored
of beautiful-haired  Mnemosyne, of whom were born to him the Muses nine, withgolden-fillets, to whom festivals, and the delight of song, are a pleasure. But Apollo
and Artemis, rejoicing-in-arrows, a lovely off-spring beyond all the sky-dwellers, Leto
 brought forth, after union in love with aegis-bearing Zeus. And last made he
blooming Hera his spouse. She bore Hebe, and Arēs, and Eileithuia, having been
united in love with the king of gods and men. But by himself, from his head, he
produced glancing-eyed Tritonis [Athena],  fierce, strife-stirring, army-leading,
unsubdued, and awesome, to whom dins, and wars, and battle are a delight.
Descendants of Kronos: Hera’s Child, Hephaistos
And Hera, without having been united in love, brought forth famous Hephaistos, as
she was furious and quarrelling with her husband; Hephaistos, distinguished in crafts
from amongst all the sky-born.
Descendants of Kronos: Children of Poseidon
 But from Amphitrite and the loud-roaring Earth-shaker sprang great and
widely-powerful Triton, who occupies the depth of the sea, and inhabits golden houses
beside his dear mother and his royal father, being a terrible god.
Descendants of Zeus
To shield-piercing Arēs, however, Kytherea [Aphrodite] bore Fear and Terror, 
formidable deities, who route dense phalanxes of men in horrid war, with the help of
city-spoiler Arēs; and Harmonia, whom high-spirited Kadmos [Kadmos] made his
spouse. Then to Zeus Maia, daughter of Atlas, bore glorious Hermes, herald of
immortals, having ascended his holy couch.  And to him Semele, daughter of
Kadmos, bore an illustrious son, Dionysus bringer of joys, after union in love, mortal
though she was, an immortal. But now both are deities. And Alkmene after union in
love with cloud-compelling Zeus bore Hēraklēs the strong.  But Hephaistos, farfamed, crippled god, took to wife blooming Aglaia, youngest of the Kharites [Graces].
And Dionysus, of golden hair, took for his blooming bride blond-tressed Ariadne,
daughter of Minos. And the son of Kronos made her immortal, and unsusceptible of old
age for him. And fair-ankled Alkmene’s valiant son, mighty Hēraklēs, having
accomplished grievous toils,  made Hebe, daughter of mighty Zeus and Hera-withgolden-sandals, his bashful wife in snowy Olympus: happy hero, who having achieved
a great work,  dwells among the immortals uninjured and ageless evermore.
Circe and Medea
To the unwearied Sun the famous daughter of Okeanos, Perseis, bore Circe and
king Aietes. And Aietes, son of man-enlightening Sun,  wedded beauteouscheeked Iduia, daughter of Okeanos, perfect through golden Aphrodite, brought forth
to him fair-ankled Medea. 
Children of Immortal Goddesses and Mortal Men
Take pleasure [in my performance], gods dwelling in Olympian abodes, islands and
continents, and briny pontos within; and now Olympian Muses, sweet of speech,
daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus,  sing you the generation of goddesses, as many
as, having been united, though immortal, with mortal men, gave birth to children
resembling gods. Demeter, divine among goddesses, after union in delightsome love,
 bore Ploutos [Wealth] to the hero Iasios, in a thrice-plowed fallow field, in the
fertile country of Crete, a kind god, who goes over all the earth, and the broad surface
of the sea; and to him that has chanced upon him, and into whose hands he may have
come, him, I say, he is accustomed to make rich, and presents to him much wealth
[olbos].  And to Kadmos, Harmonia, daughter of golden Aphrodite, bore Ino,
Semele, and fair-cheeked Agaue, and Autonoe, whom Aristaios of-clustering-locks
wedded, and Polydoros in tower-circled Thebes. But Kallirhoe, daughter of Okeanos,
united to brave-hearted Khrysaor  in union of all-golden Aphrodite, bore a son the
strongest of all mortals, Geryon, whom mighty Hēraklēs slew, for the sake of the
trailing-footed oxen in island Erytheia.
And to Tithonos Eos bore Memnon with-brazen-helm,  king of the Ethiopians,
and the sovereign Emathion. But to Kephalos in truth she [Eos] produced an illustrious
son, the brave Phaethon, comparable to the gods, whom, when young, in the tender
flower of glorious youth, a lad, conscious only of young fancies, laughter-loving
Aphrodite  snatched up, and rushed away, and she made him, in her sacred
shrine, the temple-keeper of her inner sanctum, a radiant daimōn. And the daughter
of Aietes, Zeus-descended king, Jason, son of Aison, by the counsels of ever-living
gods, carried off from Aietes, after he had fulfilled the grievous toils,  which, being
many in number, the great and overbearing king, insolent and reckless Pelias, doer of
deeds of violence, imposed upon him. Which having achieved, after having toiled
much, the son of Aison arrived at Iolkos, bearing in his fleet ship a dark-eyed maiden,
and her he made his blooming bride. Yes, and she [Medea],  having been yoked
with Jason, shepherd of his people, bore a son Medeus, whom Cheiron, son of Philyra,
reared on the mountains; while the purpose of mighty Zeus was being fulfilled.
But of the daughters of Nereus, ancient sea-god, Psamathe, divine among
goddesses, bore Phokos  in the embrace of Aiakos, through golden Aphrodite:
and the goddess Thetis, of the silver feet, yielding to Peleus, gave birth to Achilles the
lion-hearted, who-broke-the-ranks-of-men. Fair-wreathed Kytherea [Aphrodite] too,
blending in delightsome love with the hero Anchises, bore Aineias [Aeneas]  on
the peaks of many-valleyed, woody Ida. But Circe, daughter of the Sun, born-ofHyperion, by the love of Odysseus of-enduring-heart, gave birth to Agrios and
blameless and strong Latinus; Telegonos also she bore through golden Aphrodite.
 Now these, very far in a recess of sacred isles, reigned over all the very
renowned Tyrrhenians. But Kalypsō, divine among goddesses, bore to Odysseus
Nausithoös and Nausinoös after union in delightful love.
 These, though immortal, having been united with mortal men, gave birth to
children like unto the gods. And now sing you the generation of women, you sweetspoken Olympian Muses, daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus. 