in the beginning manitou, or great he-she spirit, lived alone in the sky. there were only sky, clouds, sun, and rain with the spirit. manitou decided to make something different, so he-she drilled a hole in the sky to look down to the vast emptiness. he-she poured rain and snow into the hole, then took the dirt and stones from the hole and poured that through as well. later, when manitou looked down, there was a mountain where he had poured the dirt; there were lots of other mountains, too, and a great plain. he- she stepped down onto the big moun- tain and immediately improved it by producing trees and plants with a mere touch. manitou improved the plains by waving his hands over them, bringing sweet grasses. he-she caused the sun to shine through the hole made earlier; this melted the snow, bringing streams and rivers that flowed into the oceans·the sky blue waters, who stole their color from the sky. then came rain and the fruition of the earth, and he-she continued mak- ing things. the broken-off ends of his cane were made into fish. he-she had to breathe on them to give them life. the utes used to eat fish, but they donêt any- more because once some wicked people threw their dead victims into the water, ute the ute of southwestern colorado and utah (ute>utah) are an uto-aztec- shoshonean speaking tribe. they tell an animistic ex nihilo creation from chaos myth. *** in the beginning manitou, or great he-she spirit, lived alone in the sky. there were only sky, clouds, sun, and rain with the spirit. manitou decided to make something different, so he-she drilled a hole in the sky to look down to the vast emptiness. he-she poured rain and snow into the hole, then took the dirt and stones from the hole and poured that through as well. later, when manitou looked down, there was a mountain where he had poured the dirt; there were lots of other mountains, too, and a great plain. he- she stepped down onto the big moun- tain and immediately improved it by producing trees and plants with a mere touch. manitou improved the plains by waving his hands over them, bringing sweet grasses. he-she caused the sun to shine through the hole made earlier; this melted the snow, bringing streams and rivers that flowed into the oceans·the sky blue waters, who stole their color from the sky. then came rain and the fruition of the earth, and he-she continued mak- ing things. the broken-off ends of his cane were made into fish. he-she had to breathe on them to give them life. the utes used to eat fish, but they donêt any- more because once some wicked people threw their dead victims into the water, and it is impossible to tell the right fish from the fish who used to be the dead people. manitou also made birds out of the beautiful leaves in the forest. eagles came from oak leaves, hawks from red sumac, and so forth. he-she made ani- mals from the middle of his cane. the animals lived in harmony until coyote caused trouble and the animals began to fight. manitou decided to make a boss animal that would rule wisely and keep things in order. this is why he made grizzly bear, who is still chief among animals. after creating the bear and es- tablishing laws of behavior, manitou left for the heavens.