in the beginning maori created the first man, mwuetsi, who was the moon. he placed him at the bottom of the waters, dsivoa, with a ngona horn filled with ngona oil, but mwuetsi insisted that he wanted to live on the earth. maori did not approve, but he placed mwuetsi on earth, saying that living there would end in his death. on earth mwuetsi found only barrenness, and he complained to maori. „i warned you,‰ said maori, but he sent the man a woman to keep him company. this woman was massassi, the morning star, to whom maori gave the gift of fire. maori said mwuetsi could keep massassi with him for two years. the first couple went at night into their cave. mwuetsi gathered kindling and massassi made fire by twirling the firemaker. then the man lay on one side of the fire and the woman on the other. mwuetsi lay awake wondering why god had sent him the maiden. finally, he took the ngona horn he had been given and moistened his finger with some of the oil. he leapt over the fire and touched massassi with his oiled finger. then he went back to his side and slept. in the morning massassi was huge, and soon she gave birth to plants and trees until the whole earth was covered by them. the couple lived well and happily; they learned to build, to trap, and to grow vegetables. mwuetsi worked on gathering wood and water, massassi cooked. at the end of the two years, however, maori took massassi away, and mwuetsi wept for eight years. then maori reminded mwuetsi of his original warnings against coming to earth. he sent another woman, morongo, the evening star, however, saying she also could stay two years. when on the first night mwuetsi touched morongo with his oiled finger, she told him she was not like massassi, and that he would have to oil their loins and then have intercourse with her. this mwuetsi did that night and each night after that. every morning morongo gave birth to the animals of creation. on the fourth morning she gave birth to human boys and girls, who were grown by nighttime. on the fourth night maori sent a terrible storm and again warned mwuetsi that he was heading toward his death with all of this procreation. morongo, now a temptress, told mwuetsi to build a door so maori could not see what they were doing, and the man and woman continued to sleep together against godês command. the next morning morongo gave birth to the violent animals·the lions, leopards, scorpions, and snakes. on the fifth night morongo told mwuetsi to have intercourse with his daughters, and he did. his daughters bore children and became the mothers of the people. mwuetsi became the mambo· great chief·of his people. he lived in zimbabwe, the royal precinct. one night morongo coupled with a snake, and, afterward, when mwuetsi wished to sleep with her one day she was reluctant. mwuetsi insisted, and in the night his wifeês snake-lover bit him and he became ill. as his sickness increased, the rivers and the fruits of the earth dried up. even the animals and people died. the sacred dice said that only if mwuetsi were sent back to the depths would things become better, so the children of mwuetsi strangled him and buried him. they also buried morongo with him. the two years were up, and death had come as maori had said it would. each morning the mwuetsi, the moon, rises from the sea and follows his beloved first wife, massassi, the morning star, across the heavens. 