before there was a sun, a moon, or stars, there was only the wind and a tree where some ants lived. there was also the word, which controlled everything, but the word could not be seen. the word was a catalyst for creation. once the wind became angry at the tree for standing in its way, so it blew particularly hard, tearing off a branch on which there were white ants. when they landed, the ants were hungry, so they ate all of the leaves on the branch, sparing only one, on which they defecated a huge pile. then they had no choice but to eat their own excrement, and over time, as they ate and redeposited their excrement, the pile became a mountain that finally spread to the original tree. by then the ants preferred excrement to leaves, and they continued the process of adding to the pile until it became the earth. the wind still blew on the world so strongly that parts of the excrement pile began to harden into stone. the world gradually formed, until the word sent snow and then warm wind, which melted the snow and brought a huge flood. the waters killed the ants; there was water covering everything. later the earth and the world tree joined, and the trees, grasses, rivers, and oceans took form. the air gave birth to beings that flew about singing. these beings came to earth and became animals, birds, and humans, each with its own song or language. the new beings were hungry. the animals wanted to eat the tree of life, but the humans defended it. this led to a huge war between humans and animals, and to the tradition of humans and animals eating each other. the war was so ferocious that the earth shook, and bits and pieces of it flew off, gained heat, and became the sun, moon, and stars. after the war there was the creation of gods, rain, thunder, and lightning. a long-tailed sheep with a single horn was so happy at the end of the great war that she leapt into the air, caught fire, and became the source of thunder and lightning. the new gods who sprang up were harsh with humans. one of them told the people that the sheep that had sprung into the air had killed the word, the ultimate creator, and that the people would be reduced in size and in the end would be consumed by fire.